# MSFT-24
Source file: 2024_Annual_Report.pdf
Source type: pdf_converted_from_uploaded_docx
Page numbering note: Microsoft pages are labeled by the report's printed page number; extracted PDF page = printed page + 1. NARA PDFs use the PDF page number.

===== SOURCE PAGE 5 =====
5
How can we expand opportunity?
We are democratizing access to AI and the skills needed to harness its potential, ensuring that every person, organization,
and community can benefit from the opportunities AI brings.
This year, we partnered with 375,000 nonprofits globally, providing $4.7  billion in donated and discounted technology—to
help them build capacity, drive efficiencies, innovate, and increase their impact as they take on the world’s greatest
challenges. Together with our partners, we also made significant strides in skilling. We have trained and certified 14.1 million
people across 202 countries in digital skills as of June 2024. Over 80 percent of the learners were from groups furthest from
opportunity in the digital economy.
And our work doesn’t stop there. We must do more to accelerate the equitable adoption of AI and narrow the digital divide.
That’s why we’ve launched new AI skilling initiatives in partnership with governments, educational institutions, industry, and
civil society—to help millions of people learn to use generative AI, develop AI tools, and lead AI adoption. This includes
people from underserved communities, with a focus on young people, women, rural communities, and the Global South, as
well as employees of social impact organizations.
How can we earn trust?
We recognize that trust is earned, not given. And we remain committed to earning trust every day, spanning cybersecurity,
trustworthy AI, privacy, and digital safety.
Our Secure Future Initiative advances how we design, build, test, and operate our technology to ensure we deliver solutions
that meet the highest possible standard of security. Our first  SFI Progress Report highlights updates spanning culture,
governance, technology, and operations, but we recognize that our work on security is never complete. We must and will do
more. Our promise is to continually learn, improve, and adapt to the evolving needs of an increasingly complex security
landscape.
We are focused on building AI that is trustworthy, meaning that it is secure, safe, and private. Our responsible AI practices,
grounded  in our foundational AI  principles, help ensure we do  this from the beginning. And  we’re building on this
commitment by introducing new product capabilities across our tech stack, ensuring that both our customers and developers
are safeguarded at every level. Ultimately, these commitments and capabilities are key to fulfilling our mission. The world is
looking to us to help defend and protect them, and we take that responsibility seriously.
 
In May, we published our first AI Transparency Report, which outlines how we build generative applications responsibly and
support our customers. We also released Goals and Governance: Goals and Lessons for AI, which draws lessons from other
globally governed technologies like civil aviation and nuclear power. Through our Accelerating Foundation Models Research
program, we’ve made grants to hundreds of projects in AI safety and alignment research, AI-driven scientific discovery, and
beneficial applications of AI. And we launched our Global Perspectives Responsible AI Fellowship program, designed to
center the voices of AI experts from the Global South and enable us to better understand AI’s impact on developing
countries.
As we drive AI innovation, we continue to respond to a changing privacy landscape. We provide tools to help our customers
protect their privacy and control their data, and we have published several resources outlining our approach to privacy and
AI for our consumer, commercial, and public sector customers.
Finally, we continue our work to create safe experiences online and protect customers from illegal and harmful content and
conduct. To bolster our efforts to prevent child sexual exploitation and abuse risks, we have made new commitments to
safety by design in our AI services, joined the Tech Coalition’s Lantern Program, and proposed concrete actions that US
policymakers can take to protect the public through regulatory and policy measures.
How can we protect fundamental rights?
We are committed to protecting fundamental rights—extending the benefits of technology while mitigating its potential
harms. For us, this means promoting responsible business practices, expanding connectivity and accessibility, protecting
democracy, and advancing a fair and inclusive society.

===== SOURCE PAGE 6 =====
6
Over the past year, as regulators increasingly required greater transparency and process consistency across corporate
supply chains and human rights efforts, we ensured compliance with reporting and due diligence directives. Going forward,
we’ll continue to respect global human rights and laws and take steps to mitigate the impact of our operations and our
technology on the people in our value chain.
As we build and deploy more AI solutions, connectivity and accessibility are foundational. Since 2017, we’ve extended
access to affordable high-speed internet to over 100  million people, including nearly 40  million in Africa. And we remain
focused on building inclusive, accessible AI that empowers people across the spectrum of disability.
More than 4 billion people will vote this year in their respective elections, making it the biggest election year in history. At the
Munich Security Conference in February, we came together with others across the tech sector and pledged to help prevent
deceptive AI content from interfering with global elections. As part of this pledge, we have worked to empower campaigns,
candidates, election officials, and voters to understand the risks of deceptive AI in elections and to take steps to protect
themselves and democracies. To date, we’ve conducted deepfake trainings in over 20 countries. And our corresponding
public awareness campaign has reached over 355 million people.
Lastly, we continued investing in both strategic national partnerships and community-based projects that leverage data and
insights to enable changes that advance racial equity and fairness in the criminal legal system.
How can we advance sustainability?
Finally, we are on a journey to build a more sustainable future, from addressing our own environmental footprint to
empowering our customers and the world with the technology needed to meet the climate challenge. Over the past year, we
have seen how AI can catalyze environmental progress in remarkable ways—from increasing the capacity of transmission
lines to deliver renewable power, to the discovery of new materials to support energy production and storage, to empowering
the workforce with sustainability skills.
But we also recognize the resource intensity of the infrastructure needed to yield these benefits, which is why we’re
advancing the sustainability of AI, from design to construction to operations, all while working to improve the efficiency of
these technologies. We’re also investing in innovation through Microsoft’s Climate Innovation Fund and our AI for Good Lab,
advancing research and advocating for policies that can drive global impact.
 
In our latest Environmental Sustainability Report, we shared progress toward our 2030 commitments. We’re on track in
several areas. Where we’re not yet on track, we’re mobilizing to accelerate our progress toward becoming carbon negative,
water positive, and zero waste, as well as to protect and preserve ecosystems.
When it comes to our carbon footprint, we continue to support clean electricity infrastructure through long-term investments
to bring more power onto the grids where we operate. Since setting our carbon negative target, we have contracted over 34
gigawatts of renewable energy, including projects in 24 countries.
In our efforts to become water positive, we provided more than 1.5 million people with access to clean water and sanitation,
achieving our water access target.
Our journey to zero waste includes reducing waste at our campuses and datacenters and advancing circularity for cloud
hardware, packaging, and devices. Our most recent report showed we had a reuse and recycle rate of 89.4  percent for
servers and components across all cloud hardware.
Finally, AI gives new opportunity for ecosystem and biodiversity management with solutions like AI-assisted bioacoustics.
And we’re expanding collaboration with local communities to build and operate datacenters in ways that address local
challenges and create greater benefits. This work is guided by our Sustainability Standards for new construction and our
Datacenter Community Pledge.
Learn more about our progress and learnings as we pursue our commitments in our annual Impact Summary.

===== SOURCE PAGE 11 =====
11
The Ambitions That Drive Us
To achieve our vision, our research and development efforts focus on three interconnected ambitions:
• Reinvent productivity and business processes.
• Build the intelligent cloud and intelligent edge platform.
• Create more personal computing.
Reinvent Productivity and Business Processes
At Microsoft, we provide technology and resources to help our customers create a secure, productive work environment. Our
family of products plays a key role in the ways the world works, learns, and connects.
Our growth depends on securely delivering continuous innovation and advancing our leading productivity and collaboration
tools and services, including Microsoft 365, LinkedIn, and Dynamics 365. Microsoft 365 is an AI first platform that brings
together Office, Windows, Copilot, and Enterprise Mobility + Security to help organizations empower their employees.
Copilot for Microsoft 365 combines AI with business data in the Microsoft Graph and Microsoft 365 applications. Microsoft
Teams is a comprehensive platform for communication and collaboration, with meetings, calling, chat, file collaboration, and
the ability to bring all of the applications teams use into a single place. Microsoft Viva is an employee experience platform
that brings together communications, knowledge, learning, resources, and insights.
Together, the Microsoft Cloud, Dynamics 365, Microsoft Teams, and our AI offerings bring a new era of collaborative
applications for every role and business function to get insights and business impact faster. Dynamics 365 is a portfolio of
intelligent business applications that delivers operational efficiency and breakthrough customer experiences. Our role-based
extensions of Microsoft Copilot – Copilot for Sales, Copilot for Service, and Copilot for Finance – bring together the power of
Copilot for Microsoft 365 with role-specific insights and workflow assistance to streamline business processes. Copilot
Studio allows customers to customize Copilot for Microsoft 365 or build their own Copilot. Microsoft Power Platform helps
domain experts drive productivity gains with low-code/no-code tools, robotic process automation, virtual agents, and
business intelligence. Copilot Pro is a consumer subscription service that offers faster and more powerful AI assistance in
Microsoft 365 apps and on the web. LinkedIn combines our unique data with this new generation of AI to transform the way
professionals learn, sell, market, and get hired.
Build the Intelligent Cloud and Intelligent Edge Platform
Digital transformation and adoption of AI continues to revolutionize more business workstreams for organizations in every
sector  across  the  globe.  For  enterprises,  digital  technology  empowers  employees,  optimizes  operations,  engages
customers, and in some cases, changes the very core of products and services. We continue to invest in high performance
and sustainable computing to meet the growing demand for fast access to Microsoft services provided by our network of
cloud computing and AI infrastructure and datacenters.
Our cloud business benefits from three economies of scale: datacenters that deploy computational resources at significantly
lower cost per unit than smaller ones; datacenters that coordinate and aggregate diverse customer, geographic, and
application demand patterns, improving the utilization of computing, storage, and network resources; and multi-tenancy
locations that lower application maintenance labor costs.
The Microsoft Cloud provides the best integration across the technology stack while offering openness, improving time to
value, reducing costs, and increasing agility. As the foundation of the Microsoft Cloud, Azure uniquely offers hybrid
consistency, developer productivity, data and AI capabilities, and trusted security and compliance.
We offer supercomputing power for AI at scale to run large workloads, complemented by our rapidly expanding portfolio of AI
cloud services and hardware, which includes custom-built silicon and strong partnerships with chip manufacturers. We have
introduced purpose-built cloud infrastructure for AI workloads including a custom AI accelerator, Azure Maia, and a custom
in-house central processing unit, Azure Cobalt.

===== SOURCE PAGE 12 =====
12
Our AI platform, Azure AI, is helping organizations transform, bringing intelligence and insights to the hands of their
employees and customers to solve their most pressing challenges. We offer a wide selection of industry-leading frontier and
open models, including from partners, as well as state-of-the-art tooling, and AI-optimized infrastructure, delivering the
Copilot stack for Microsoft, enterprises, and developers. Organizations large and small are deploying Azure AI solutions to
achieve more at scale, more easily, with the proper enterprise-level responsible AI and safety and security protections.
Azure AI Studio provides a full lifecycle toolchain customers can use to ground these models on their own data, create
prompt workflows, and help ensure they are deployed and used safely.
GitHub Copilot is at the forefront of AI-powered software development, giving developers a tool to write code easier and
faster. From GitHub to Visual Studio, we provide a developer tool chain for everyone, no matter the technical experience,
across all platforms.
We have a long-term partnership with OpenAI, a leading AI research and deployment company. We deploy OpenAI’s
models across our consumer and enterprise products. As OpenAI’s exclusive cloud provider, Azure powers all of OpenAI’s
workloads. We have also increased our investments in the development and deployment of specialized supercomputing
systems to accelerate OpenAI’s research.
Our hybrid infrastructure offers integrated, end-to-end security, compliance, identity, and management capabilities to
support the real-world needs and evolving regulatory requirements of commercial customers and enterprises. Our industry
clouds bring together capabilities across the entire Microsoft Cloud, along with industry-specific customizations. Azure Arc
simplifies governance and management by delivering a consistent multi-cloud and on-premises management platform.
The Microsoft Intelligent Data Platform fully integrates databases, analytics, and governance. Microsoft Fabric is an end-to-
end, unified analytics platform that brings together all the data and analytics tools that organizations need.
Nuance is a leader in conversational AI and ambient intelligence across industries, including healthcare, financial services,
retail, and telecommunications. Microsoft and Nuance enable organizations to accelerate their business goals with security-
focused, cloud-based solutions infused with AI.
As the rate and pace of cyberthreats continue to accelerate, security is a top priority for every organization. Microsoft offers
customers integrated products addressing security, compliance, identity, management, and privacy across customers’ multi-
cloud, application, and device assets. With Copilot for Security, Microsoft offers an AI cybersecurity product that enables
security professionals to respond to cyberthreats quickly.
Windows 365 enables users to stream a full Windows experience from the Microsoft Cloud to any device.
Create More Personal Computing
We strive to make computing more personal, enabling users to interact with technology in more intuitive, engaging, and
dynamic ways.
Windows 11 offers innovations focused on performance, productivity, and creativity, including Copilot in Windows. Windows
11 security and privacy features include operating system security, application security, and user and identity security. Dev
Home is an open-source experience in Windows to help developer productivity. We are committed to designing and
marketing first-party devices to help drive innovation, create new device categories, and stimulate demand in the Windows
ecosystem. The Surface family includes Surface Pro, Surface Laptop, and other Surface products. Copilot+ PCs are a new
class of Windows 11 PCs that are powered by a neural processing unit. These PCs use on-device AI for enhanced
performance and features.
Copilot is an AI assistant that helps users navigate the web, answer questions, and create content. Microsoft Edge is our fast
and secure browser that helps protect users’ data and offers enhanced browsing capabilities including quick access to AI-
powered tools, apps, and more. The AI-powered Bing search engine with Copilot delivers better search, more complete
answers, and the ability to generate content.
 
Microsoft is expanding how billions of people globally access and play video games on PC, console, mobile, and cloud. We
put game development front and center, backed by innovative hardware, experiences, and a subscription service, Xbox
Game Pass, that allows those games to reach more players across more devices. Activision Blizzard, Inc. (“Activision
Blizzard”), a leader in game development and an interactive entertainment content publisher, joined Microsoft in October
2023.

===== SOURCE PAGE 13 =====
13
Our Future Opportunity
We are focused on helping customers use the breadth and depth of the Microsoft Cloud to get the most value out of their
digital spend while leading the AI platform wave across our solution areas. We continue to develop complete, intelligent
solutions for our customers that empower people to be productive and collaborate, while safeguarding businesses and
simplifying IT management. Our goal is to lead the industry in several distinct areas of technology over the long term, which
we expect will translate to sustained growth. We are investing significant resources in:
• Transforming the workplace to deliver new modern, modular business applications, drive deeper insights, and
improve how people communicate, collaborate, learn, work, and interact with one another.
• Building  and  running  cloud-based  services  in  ways  that  utilize  ubiquitous  computing  to  unleash  new
experiences and opportunities for businesses and individuals.
• Applying  AI  and  ambient  intelligence  to  drive  insights,  revolutionize  many  types  of  work  and  business
processes, and provide substantive productivity gains using natural methods of communication.
• Tackling security from all angles with our integrated, end-to-end solutions spanning security, compliance,
identity, and management, across all clouds and platforms.
• Inventing new gaming experiences that bring people together around their shared love for games on any
devices and pushing the boundaries of innovation with console and PC gaming.
• Using  Windows  to  fuel  our  cloud  business,  grow  our  share  of  the  PC  market,  and  drive  increased
engagement with our services like Microsoft Edge, Bing, Microsoft Teams, Microsoft 365 Consumer, Xbox
Game Pass, and more.
Our future growth depends on our ability to transcend current product category definitions, business models, and sales
motions.
Corporate Social Responsibility
Commitment to Sustainability
Microsoft’s approach to addressing climate change starts with the sustainability of our own business. In 2020, we committed
to being a carbon negative, water positive, and zero waste company by 2030.
Since announcing that commitment, we have seen major changes both in the technology sector and in our understanding of
what it will take to meet our climate goals. New technologies, including generative AI, hold promise for new innovations that
can help address the climate crisis. At the same time, the infrastructure and electricity needed for these technologies create
new challenges for meeting sustainability commitments across the tech sector.
In May 2024, we released our Environmental Sustainability Report which looked back at our progress in several areas during
fiscal year 2023. In four areas we are on track, and in each of these we see progress that has the potential to have global
impact beyond our own sustainability work. These are:
• Reducing our direct operational emissions (Scope 1 and 2).
• Accelerating carbon removal.  
• Designing for circularity to minimize waste and reusing cloud hardware.
• Improving biodiversity and protecting more land than we use.
At the same time, there are two areas where we’re not yet on track, and in each of these we are intensively engaged in work
to identify and pursue additional breakthroughs. These are:
• Reducing our indirect emissions (Scope 3).
• Reducing our water use and replenishing more water than we consume in our datacenter operations.
Even amid the challenges, we remain optimistic. We’re encouraged by ongoing progress across our campuses and
datacenters, and throughout our value chain.

===== SOURCE PAGE 14 =====
14
Addressing Racial Injustice and Inequity
In June 2020, we outlined a series of multi-year commitments designed to address the racial injustice and inequity
experienced by racial and ethnic minorities in the United States, including Black and African American communities. We
remain committed to addressing racial injustice and inequity and helping improve lived experiences at Microsoft, in
employees’ communities, and beyond.
In fiscal year 2024, we continued to collaborate with partners and worked within neighborhoods and communities to advance
projects and programs. We grew our Nonprofit Tech Acceleration for Black and African American Communities program, to
help more than 3,000 local organizations in nearly 1,900 Black and African American communities use technical solutions to
modernize and streamline operations. We also expanded our Technology Education and Learning Support (“TEALS”)
program to reach nearly 550 high schools across 21 racial equity expansion regions with the support of nearly 1,500
volunteers, 12% of whom identify as Black or African American.
We have committed $150 million in Minority Depository Institutions and funds supporting Black and African American-owned
small  businesses.  These  commitments  drive  sustained  impact  by  directly  enabling  an  increase  of  funds  into  local
communities, improving diverse, small-business access to capital, and increasing skill development. We continue to partner
with diverse-owned banking partners and asset managers to catalyze growth and industry participation. Additionally, we
enriched our supplier pipeline, achieving our goal to spend $500  million with double the number of Black- and African
American-owned suppliers. We have also provided 162 low- or no-interest loans to our small to medium-sized partners
through our Partner Capital Fund.
We also continue to make progress toward our overall commitment to double the number of Black and African American and
Hispanic and Latinx leaders in the U.S. by 2025.
Investing in Digital Skills
Microsoft’s Skills for Jobs initiative aims to support a more skills-based labor market, with greater flexibility and accessible
learning paths to develop the right skills needed for the most in-demand jobs. This initiative brings together classes, Career
Essentials Certificates, and other resources from LinkedIn, GitHub, and Microsoft Learn, and is built on data insights drawn
from LinkedIn’s Economic Graph. Our goal was to train and certify 10  million learners by 2025. As of May 2024, we have
surpassed that goal, training and certifying 12.6 million learners. We also launched a campaign in the United States in 2021
to help skill and recruit 250,000 people into the nation’s cybersecurity workforce by 2025, representing half of the country’s
workforce shortage. To that end, we are making curriculum available free of charge to all of the nation’s higher education
institutions, providing training for new and existing faculty, and providing scholarships and supplemental resources to 25,000
students. The cyber skills initiative has expanded to 27 additional countries that show elevated cyberthreat risks coupled with
significant gaps in their cybersecurity workforces, where we’ve partnered with nonprofits and other educational institutions to
train the next generation of cybersecurity workers.
 
Generative AI is creating unparalleled opportunities to empower workers globally, but only if everyone has the skills to use it.
In June 2023, we launched an AI Skills initiative to help everyone learn how to harness the power of AI. This includes a new
LinkedIn learning pathway offering new coursework on learning the foundations of generative AI. We also launched a new
global grant challenge to uncover new ways of training workers on generative AI and provide greater access to digital
learning events and resources. Additionally, we extended our reach in rural communities, including through our TechSpark
initiative in the United States. As of June 2024, we’ve helped more than 2.5  million people in 92% of the world’s countries
learn how to use AI.
HUMAN CAPITAL RESOURCES
Microsoft aims to recruit, develop, and retain world-changing talent from a diversity of backgrounds. To foster their and our
success, we seek to create an environment where people can thrive and do their best work. We strive to maximize the
potential of our human capital resources by creating a respectful, rewarding, and inclusive work environment that enables
our global employees to create products and services that further our mission. Microsoft’s culture is grounded in growth
mindset. This means everyone is on a continuous journey to learn and grow, operating as one company instead of multiple
siloed businesses. Our culture also embeds the security of customers and Microsoft as a priority for every employee and
across all of our organizations.

===== SOURCE PAGE 15 =====
15
As of June  30, 2024, we employed approximately 228,000 people on a full-time basis, 126,000 in the U.S. and 102,000
internationally. Of the total employed people, 86,000 were in operations, including product support and consulting services,
datacenter operations, and manufacturing and distribution; 81,000 were in product research and development; 45,000 were
in sales and marketing; and 16,000 were in general and administration. Certain employees are subject to collective
bargaining agreements.
We design our programs to attract, reward, and retain top talent, enable our employees’ continual growth, and reinforce our
culture and values. Our total compensation opportunity is highly differentiated and market competitive. Our intended result is
a global performance and development approach that fosters our culture, drives company performance, and competitive
compensation that ensures equitable pay by role while supporting pay for performance.
Diversity and inclusion are core to our business. As reported in our Global Diversity and Inclusion Reports, we monitor pay
equity and career progress across multiple dimensions. We encourage every person at Microsoft to play an active role in
creating an inclusive environment.
We have invested significantly in employee wellbeing and offer a differentiated benefits package which includes many
physical, emotional, and financial wellness programs. Our Occupational Health and Safety program helps to protect
employees’ safety while they are working. We also have introduced Hybrid Workplace Flexibility guidance to better support
leaders, managers, and employees in hybrid work scenarios.
We believe providing employees with access to continual learning enables them to drive impact for the company. We provide
individuals and teams with access to first and third-party content resources across professions, disciplines, and roles, and
offer skilling opportunities to support employees’ growth while driving organizations’ needs.
Our employee listening systems enable us to gather feedback directly from our workforce to inform our programs and
employee needs globally, giving us real-time insights into ways we can support our employees. As a company, we will
continue to leverage data and research to inform decision making, balancing the needs of the business, team, and individual.
OPERATING SEGMENTS
We operate our business and report our financial performance using three segments: Productivity and Business Processes,
Intelligent Cloud, and More Personal Computing. Our segments provide management with a comprehensive financial view
of our key businesses. The segments enable the alignment of strategies and objectives across the development, sales,
marketing, and services organizations, and they provide a framework for timely and rational allocation of resources within
businesses.
Additional information on our operating segments and geographic and product information is contained in Note 19 –
Segment Information and Geographic Data of the Notes to Financial Statements.
Our reportable segments are described below.
Productivity and Business Processes
Our Productivity and Business Processes segment consists of products and services in our portfolio of productivity,
communication, and information services, spanning a variety of devices and platforms. This segment primarily comprises:
• Office  Commercial  (Office  365  subscriptions,  the  Office  365  portion  of  Microsoft  365  Commercial
subscriptions, and Office licensed on-premises), comprising Office, Exchange, SharePoint, Microsoft Teams,
Office 365 Security and Compliance, Microsoft Viva, and Copilot for Microsoft 365.
• Office Consumer,  including  Microsoft  365  Consumer and  Copilot  Pro subscriptions,  Office  licensed  on-
premises, and other Office services.
• LinkedIn, including Talent Solutions, Marketing Solutions, Premium Subscriptions, and Sales Solutions.
• Dynamics  business  solutions,  including  Dynamics  365,  comprising  a  set  of  intelligent,  cloud-based
applications  across  ERP,  CRM,  Power  Apps,  and  Power  Automate;  and  on-premises  ERP  and  CRM
applications.

===== SOURCE PAGE 16 =====
16
Office Commercial
Office Commercial is designed to increase personal, team, and organizational productivity through a range of products and
services. Growth depends on our ability to reach new users in new markets such as frontline workers, small and medium
businesses, and growth markets, as well as add value to our core product and service offerings to span AI and productivity
categories such as communication, collaboration, analytics, security, and compliance. Office Commercial revenue is mainly
affected by a combination of continued installed base growth and average revenue per user expansion, as well as the
continued shift from Office licensed on-premises to Office 365.
Office Consumer
Office Consumer is designed to increase personal productivity and creativity through a range of products and services.
Growth depends on our ability to reach new users, add value to our core product set with new features including AI tools, and
continue to expand our product and service offerings into new markets. Office Consumer revenue is mainly affected by the
percentage of customers that buy Office with their new devices and the continued shift from Office licensed on-premises to
Microsoft  365  Consumer  subscriptions.  Office  Consumer  Services  revenue  is  mainly  affected  by  the  demand  for
communication  and  storage  through  Skype,  Outlook.com,  and  OneDrive,  which  is  largely  driven  by  subscriptions,
advertising, and the sale of minutes.
LinkedIn
LinkedIn connects the world’s professionals to make them more productive and successful and transforms the way
companies hire, market, sell, and learn. Our vision is to create economic opportunity for every member of the global
workforce through the ongoing development of the world’s first Economic Graph, a digital representation of the global
economy. In addition to LinkedIn’s free services, LinkedIn offers monetized solutions designed to offer AI-enabled insights
and productivity: Talent Solutions, Marketing Solutions, Premium Subscriptions, and Sales Solutions. Talent Solutions
provide insights for workforce planning and tools to hire, nurture, and develop talent. Talent Solutions also includes Learning
Solutions, which help businesses close critical skills gaps in times where companies are having to do more with existing
talent. Marketing Solutions help companies reach, engage, and convert their audiences at scale. Premium Subscriptions
enable professionals to manage their professional identity, grow their network, find jobs, access knowledge, and connect
with  talent  through  additional  services  like  premium  search.  Sales  Solutions  help  companies  strengthen  customer
relationships, empower teams with digital selling tools, and acquire new opportunities. Growth will depend on our ability to
increase the number of LinkedIn members and our ability to continue offering insight and AI-enabled services that provide
value for our members and increase their engagement. LinkedIn revenue is mainly affected by demand from enterprises and
professionals for subscriptions to Talent Solutions, Sales Solutions, and Premium Subscriptions offerings, as well as
member engagement and the quality of the sponsored content delivered to those members to drive Marketing Solutions.
Dynamics
Dynamics  provides  cloud-based  and  on-premises  business  solutions  for financial  management,  enterprise  resource
planning (“ERP”), customer relationship management (“CRM”), and supply chain management, as well as other low code
application development platforms and AI offerings, for small and medium businesses, large organizations, and divisions of
global enterprises. Dynamics revenue is driven by the number of users licensed and applications consumed, expansion of
average revenue per user, and the continued shift to Dynamics 365, a unified set of cloud-based intelligent business
applications, including our low code development platforms, such as Power Apps and Power Automate.

===== SOURCE PAGE 17 =====
17
Competition
Competitors to Office include software and global application vendors, such as Apple, Cisco Systems, Google, Meta,
Proofpoint, Slack, Symantec, Zoom, and numerous web-based and mobile application competitors as well as local
application developers. Apple distributes versions of its pre-installed application software, such as email and calendar
products, through its PCs, tablets, and phones. Cisco Systems is using its position in enterprise communications equipment
to grow its unified communications business. Google provides a hosted messaging and productivity suite. Meta offers
communication tools to enable productivity and engagement within organizations. Proofpoint and Symantec provide security
solutions across email security, information protection, and governance. Slack provides teamwork and collaboration
software. Zoom offers videoconferencing and cloud phone solutions. Web-based offerings competing with individual
applications have also positioned themselves as alternatives to our products and services. We compete by providing
powerful, flexible, secure, integrated industry-specific, and easy-to-use productivity and collaboration tools and services that
create comprehensive solutions and work well with technologies our customers already have both on-premises or in the
cloud.
LinkedIn faces competition from online professional networks, recruiting companies, talent management companies, and
larger companies that are focusing on talent management and human resource services; job boards; traditional recruiting
firms; and companies that provide learning and development products and services. Marketing Solutions competes with
online and offline outlets that generate revenue from advertisers and marketers, and Sales Solutions competes with online
and offline outlets for companies with lead generation and customer intelligence and insights.
Dynamics competes with cloud-based and on-premises business solution providers such as Oracle, Salesforce, SAP,
Service Now, UI Path, and WorkDay.
Intelligent Cloud
Our Intelligent Cloud segment consists of our public, private, and hybrid server products and cloud services that can power
modern business and developers. This segment primarily comprises:
• Server products and cloud services, including Azure and other cloud services; SQL Server, Windows Server,
Visual Studio, System Center, and related Client Access Licenses (“CALs”); and Nuance and GitHub.  
• Enterprise  and  partner  services,  including  Enterprise  Support  Services,  Industry  Solutions,  Nuance
professional services, Microsoft Partner Network, and Learning Experience.
Server Products and Cloud Services
Azure is a comprehensive set of cloud services that offer developers, IT professionals, and enterprises freedom to build,
deploy, and manage applications on any platform or device. Customers can use Azure through our global network of
datacenters for computing, networking, storage, mobile and web application services, AI, Internet of Things (“IoT”), cognitive
services, and machine learning. Azure enables customers to devote more resources to development and use of applications
that benefit their organizations, rather than managing on-premises hardware and software. Azure revenue is mainly affected
by infrastructure-as-a-service and platform-as-a-service consumption-based services, and per user-based services such as
Enterprise Mobility + Security.
Azure AI offerings provide a competitive advantage as companies seek ways to optimize and scale their business with
machine learning. With Azure’s purpose-built, AI-optimized infrastructure, customers can use a variety of large language
models and developer tools to create the next generation of AI apps and services.
Our server products are designed to make IT professionals, developers, and their systems more productive and efficient.
Server software is integrated server infrastructure and middleware designed to support software applications built on the
Windows  Server  operating  system.  This  includes  the  server  platform,  database,  business  intelligence,  storage,
management and operations, virtualization, service-oriented architecture platform, security, and identity software. We also
license standalone and software development lifecycle tools for software architects, developers, testers, and project
managers. Server products revenue is mainly affected by purchases through volume licensing programs, licenses sold to
original equipment manufacturers (“OEM”), and retail packaged products. CALs provide access rights to certain server
products, including SQL Server and Windows Server, and revenue is reported along with the associated server product.

===== SOURCE PAGE 18 =====
18
Nuance and GitHub include both cloud and on-premises offerings. Nuance provides healthcare and enterprise AI solutions.
GitHub provides a collaboration platform and code hosting service for developers.
Enterprise and Partner Services
Enterprise and Partner Services, including Enterprise Support Services, Industry Solutions, Nuance professional services,
Microsoft Partner Network, and Learning Experience, assist customers in developing, deploying, and managing Microsoft
server solutions, Microsoft desktop solutions, and Nuance conversational AI and ambient intelligent solutions, along with
providing training and certification to developers and IT professionals on various Microsoft products.
Competition
Azure faces diverse competition from companies such as Amazon, Broadcom, Google, IBM, Oracle, and open source
offerings. Azure’s competitive advantage includes enabling a hybrid cloud, allowing deployment of existing datacenters with
our public cloud into a single, cohesive infrastructure, and the ability to run at a scale that meets the needs of businesses of
all sizes and complexities. Our AI offerings compete with AI products from hyperscalers such as Amazon and Google, as well
as products from other emerging competitors, including Anthropic, OpenAI, Meta, and other open source offerings, many of
which are also current or potential partners. Our Azure Security offerings include our cloud security solution and security
information and event management solution, which compete with companies such as Palo Alto Networks and Cisco. Our
Enterprise Mobility + Security offerings also compete with products from a range of competitors including identity vendors,
security solution vendors, and numerous other security point solution vendors. We believe our cloud’s global scale, coupled
with our broad portfolio of identity and security solutions, allows us to effectively solve complex cybersecurity challenges for
our customers and differentiates us from the competition.
 
Our server products face competition from a wide variety of server operating systems and applications offered by companies
with a range of market approaches. Vertically integrated computer manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packard, IBM, and Oracle
offer their own versions of the Unix operating system preinstalled on server hardware and nearly all computer manufacturers
offer server hardware for the Linux operating system.
We compete to provide enterprise-wide computing and point solutions with numerous commercial software vendors that
offer solutions and middleware technology platforms, software applications for connectivity, security, hosting, database, and
e-business servers. IBM and Oracle lead a group of companies that compete with our enterprise-wide computing solutions.
Commercial competitors for our server applications for PC-based distributed client-server environments include Broadcom,
IBM, and Oracle. Our web application platform software competes with open source software such as Apache, Linux,
MySQL, and PHP. In middleware, we compete against Java vendors.
Our database, business intelligence, and data warehousing solutions offerings compete with products from Databricks, IBM,
Oracle, SAP, Snowflake, and other companies. Our system management solutions compete with server management and
server virtualization platform providers, such as BMC, Broadcom, Hewlett-Packard, and IBM. Our products for software
developers compete against offerings from Adobe, IBM, Oracle, and other companies, and also against open source
projects, including Eclipse (sponsored by IBM, Oracle, and SAP), PHP, and Ruby on Rails.
We  believe our server products  provide customers with  advantages in  performance,  total  costs of  ownership,  and
productivity by delivering superior applications, development tools, compatibility with a broad base of hardware and software
applications, security, and manageability.
Our Enterprise and Partner Services business competes with a wide range of companies that provide strategy and business
planning, application development, and infrastructure services, including multinational consulting firms and small niche
businesses focused on specific technologies.
More Personal Computing
Our More Personal Computing segment consists of products and services that put customers at the center of the experience
with our technology. This segment primarily comprises:
• Windows, including Windows OEM licensing and other non-volume  licensing of  the Windows operating
system; Windows Commercial, comprising volume licensing of the Windows operating system, Windows cloud
services, and other Windows commercial offerings; patent licensing; and Windows Internet of Things.

===== SOURCE PAGE 19 =====
19
• Devices, including Surface, HoloLens, and PC accessories.
• Gaming, including Xbox hardware and Xbox content and services, comprising first-party content (such as
Activision Blizzard) and third-party content, including games and in-game content; Xbox Game Pass and other
subscriptions; Xbox Cloud Gaming; advertising; third-party disc royalties; and other cloud services.
• Search and news advertising, comprising Bing (including Copilot), Microsoft News, Microsoft Edge, and third-
party affiliates.
Windows
The Windows operating system is designed to deliver a more personal computing experience for users by enabling
consistency  of  experience,  applications,  and  information  across  their  devices.  Windows  OEM  revenue  is  impacted
significantly by the number of Windows operating system licenses purchased by OEMs, which they pre-install on the devices
they sell. In addition to computing device market volume, Windows OEM revenue is impacted by:
• The mix of computing devices based on form factor and screen size.
• Differences in device market demand between developed markets and growth markets.
• Growth of the AI PC category  
• Attachment of Windows to devices shipped.
• Customer mix between consumer, small and medium businesses, and large enterprises.
• Changes in inventory levels in the OEM channel.
• Pricing changes and promotions, pricing variation that occurs when the mix of devices manufactured shifts
from local and regional system builders to large multinational OEMs, and different pricing of Windows versions
licensed.
• Constraints in the supply chain of device components.
• Piracy.
Windows Commercial revenue, which includes volume licensing of the Windows operating system and Windows cloud
services such as Microsoft Defender for Endpoint, is affected mainly by the demand from commercial customers for
Microsoft 365 and our advanced security offerings. Windows Commercial revenue often reflects the number of information
workers in a licensed enterprise and is relatively independent of the number of PCs sold in a given year.
Patent licensing includes our programs to license patents we own for use across a broad array of technology areas, including
mobile devices and cloud offerings.
Windows IoT extends the power of Windows and the cloud to intelligent systems by delivering specialized operating
systems, tools, and services for use in embedded devices.
Devices
We design and sell devices, such as Surface (including Copilot+ PCs), HoloLens, and PC accessories. Our devices are
designed to enable people and organizations to connect to the people and content that matter most using Windows and
integrated Microsoft products and services. Surface is designed to help organizations, students, and consumers be more
productive. Growth in Devices is dependent on total PC shipments, the ability to attract new customers, our product
roadmap, and expanding into new categories.
Gaming
Our gaming platform is designed to provide a variety of entertainment through a unique combination of content, community,
and  cloud  services.  Our  game  content  is  developed  through  a  collection  of  first-party  studios  creating  iconic  and
differentiated gaming experiences. We continue to invest in new gaming studios and content to expand our intellectual
property roadmap and leverage new content creators. These unique gaming experiences are the cornerstone of Xbox Game
Pass, a subscription service and gaming community with access to a curated library of over 400 first- and third-party console
and PC titles.

===== SOURCE PAGE 20 =====
20
The gamer remains at the heart of the Xbox ecosystem. We are identifying new opportunities to attract gamers across a
variety of different end points through our first- and third-party content and business diversification across subscriptions, ads,
and digital stores. We’ve seen new devices from third-party manufacturers along with key PC and mobile end points that
help us empower gamers to play in a way that is most convenient to them. We are focused on growing the platform and
expanding to new ecosystems to engage as many gamers as possible.
Xbox enables people to connect and share online gaming experiences that are accessible on Xbox consoles, Windows-
enabled devices, and other devices. Xbox is designed to benefit users by providing access to a network of certified
applications and services and to benefit our developer and partner ecosystems by providing access to a large customer
base. Xbox revenue is mainly affected by subscriptions and sales of first- and third-party content, as well as advertising.
Growth of our Gaming business is determined by the overall active user base through Xbox enabled content, availability of
games, providing exclusive game content that gamers seek, the computational power and reliability of the devices used to
access our content and services, and the ability to create new experiences.
 
Search and News Advertising
Our Search and news advertising business is designed to deliver relevant search, native, and display advertising to a global
audience. Our Microsoft Edge browser and Bing search engine with Copilot are key tools to enable user acquisition and
engagement, while our technology platform enables accelerated delivery of digital advertising solutions. In addition to first-
party tools, we have several partnerships with companies, such as Yahoo, through which we provide and monetize search
offerings. Growth depends on our ability to attract new users, understand intent, and match intent with relevant content on
advertising offerings.
Competition
Windows faces competition from various software products and from alternative platforms and devices, mainly from Apple
and Google, and Microsoft Defender for Endpoint competes with CrowdStrike on endpoint security solutions. We believe
Windows  competes  effectively  by  giving  customers  choice,  value,  flexibility,  security,  an  easy-to-use  interface,  and
compatibility with a broad range of hardware and software applications, including those that enable productivity.
Devices face competition from various computer, tablet, and hardware manufacturers who offer a unique combination of
high-quality industrial design and innovative technologies across various price points. These manufacturers, many of which
are also current or potential partners and customers, include Apple and our Windows OEMs.
Xbox and our cloud gaming services face competition from various online gaming ecosystems and game streaming
services, including those operated by Amazon, Apple, Meta, and Tencent. We also compete with other providers of
entertainment services such as video streaming platforms. Our gaming platform competes with console platforms from
Nintendo and Sony, both of which have a large, established base of customers. We believe our gaming platform is effectively
positioned against, and uniquely differentiated from, competitive products and services based on significant innovation in
hardware architecture, user interface, developer tools, online gaming and entertainment services, and continued strong
content from our own first-party game franchises as well as other digital content offerings.
Our Search and news advertising business competes with Google, OpenAI, and a wide array of websites, social platforms
like Meta, and portals that provide content and online offerings to end users.
OPERATIONS
We have regional operations service centers that support our operations, including customer contract and order processing,
billing, credit and collections, customer lifecycle operations, information processing, and vendor management and logistics.
The centers in Ireland and Romania support the African, European, and Middle East regions; the centers in India and Ireland
support the Asia-Pacific region; and the centers in Arlington, Virginia, Atlanta, Georgia, Charlotte, North Carolina, Fargo,
North Dakota, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, Redmond, Washington, Reno, Nevada, and San Jose, Costa Rica support the
Americas regions.
In addition to our operations centers, we also operate datacenters throughout each of these regions. We continue to identify
and evaluate opportunities to expand our datacenter locations and increase our server capacity to meet the evolving needs
of our customers, particularly given the growing demand for AI services. Our datacenters depend on the availability of

===== SOURCE PAGE 21 =====
21
permitted and buildable land, predictable energy, networking supplies, and servers, including graphics processing units
(“GPUs”) and other components.
Our devices are primarily manufactured by third-party contract manufacturers. For the majority of our products, we have the
ability to use other manufacturers if a current vendor becomes unavailable or unable to meet our requirements. However,
some of our products contain certain components for which there are very few qualified suppliers. Extended disruptions at
these suppliers could impact our ability to manufacture devices on time to meet consumer demand.
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Product and Service Development, and Intellectual Property
We develop most of our products and services internally through the following engineering groups.
• Cloud and AI – focuses on making IT professionals, developers, partners, independent software vendors, and
their systems more productive and efficient through development of Azure AI platform and cloud infrastructure,
server, database, CRM, ERP, software development tools and services, AI cognitive services, and other
business process applications and services for enterprises.
• Strategic Missions and Technologies  – focuses on incubating technical products and support solutions with
transformative potential for the future of cloud computing and continued company growth, such as quantum
computing and advanced AI for science.
• Experiences and Devices  – focuses on delivering high value end-user experiences across our products,
services, and devices, including Microsoft 365, Windows, Microsoft Teams, and the Surface line of devices.
• Microsoft AI  – focuses on delivering online experiences targeted at consumers (including Bing, Copilot,
Start/MSN, and other advertising-based services) and developing advanced AI models.
• Microsoft Security – focuses on delivering a comprehensive portfolio of services that protect our customers’
digital infrastructure through cloud platform and application security, data protection and governance, identity
and network access, and device management.
• Technology and Research – focuses on fundamental research, product and business incubations, and forward-
looking AI innovations that span infrastructure, services, and applications. This engineering group includes
Microsoft Research, one of the world’s largest corporate research organizations, which focuses on fundamental
research in AI, computer science, and a broad range of other disciplines.
• LinkedIn – focuses on our services that transform the way professionals grow their network and find jobs and
the way businesses hire, market, sell, and learn.
• Gaming – focuses on developing hardware, content, and services across a large range of platforms to help grow
our user base through game experiences and social interaction.
Internal development allows us to maintain competitive advantages that come from product differentiation and closer
technical  control  over  our  products  and  services.  It  also  gives  us  the  freedom  to  decide  which  modifications  and
enhancements are most important and when they should be implemented. We strive to obtain information as early as
possible about changing usage patterns and hardware advances that may affect software and hardware design. Before
releasing new software platforms, and as we make significant modifications to existing platforms, we provide application
vendors with a range of resources and guidelines for development, training, and testing. Generally, we also create product
documentation internally.
We protect our intellectual property investments in a variety of ways. We work actively in the U.S. and internationally to
ensure the enforcement of copyright, trademark, trade secret, and other protections that apply to our software and hardware
products, services, business plans, and branding. We are a leader among technology companies in pursuing patents and
currently have a portfolio of over 63,000 U.S. and international patents issued and over 23,000 pending worldwide. While we
employ much of our internally-developed intellectual property in our products and services, we also engage in outbound
licensing of specific patented technologies that are incorporated into licensees’ products. From time to time, we enter into
broader cross-license agreements with other technology companies covering entire groups of patents. We may also
purchase or license technology that we incorporate into our products and services. At times, we make select intellectual
property broadly available at no or low cost to achieve a strategic objective, such as promoting industry standards,
advancing  interoperability,  supporting  societal  and/or  environmental  efforts,  or  attracting  and  enabling  our  external

===== SOURCE PAGE 22 =====
22
development community. Our engagement with open source software also causes us to license our intellectual property
rights broadly in certain situations.
While it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of our products and services, we
believe, based upon past experience and industry practice, such licenses generally can be obtained on commercially
reasonable terms. We believe our continuing research and product development are not materially dependent on any single
license or other agreement with a third party relating to the development of our products.
 
Investing in the Future
Our success is based on our ability to create new and compelling products, services, and experiences for our users, to
initiate and embrace disruptive technology trends, to enter new geographic and product markets, and to drive broad adoption
of our products and services. We invest in a range of emerging technology trends and breakthroughs that we believe offer
significant opportunities to deliver value to our customers and growth for the company. Based on our assessment of key
technology trends, we maintain our long-term commitment to research and development across a wide spectrum of
technologies, tools, and platforms spanning digital work and life experiences, cloud computing, AI, devices, and operating
systems.
While our main product research and development facilities are located in Redmond, Washington, we also operate research
and development facilities in other parts of the U.S. and around the world. This global approach helps us remain competitive
in local markets and enables us to continue to attract top talent from across the world.
We plan to continue to make significant investments in a broad range of product research and development activities, and as
appropriate we will coordinate our research and development across operating segments and leverage the results across
the company. This includes continuing to support fundamental research, which provides us with a unique perspective on
future trends and contributes to our innovation.
DISTRIBUTION, SALES, AND MARKETING
We market and distribute our products and services through the following channels: OEMs, direct, and distributors and
resellers. Our sales organization performs a variety of functions, including working directly with commercial enterprises and
public-sector organizations worldwide to  identify and meet their technology and digital transformation requirements;
managing OEM relationships; and supporting system integrators, independent software vendors, and other partners who
engage directly with our customers to perform sales, consulting, and fulfillment functions for our products and services.
OEMs
We distribute our products and services through OEMs that pre-install our software on new devices and servers they sell.
The largest component of the OEM business is the Windows operating system pre-installed on devices. OEMs also sell
devices pre-installed with other Microsoft products and services, including applications such as Office and the capability to
subscribe to Microsoft 365 Consumer.
There are two broad categories of OEMs.  The largest category of OEMs are direct OEMs as our relationship with them is
managed through a direct agreement between Microsoft and the OEM. We have distribution agreements covering one or
more of our products with virtually all the multinational OEMs, including Dell, Hewlett-Packard, Lenovo, and with many
regional and local OEMs.  The second broad category of OEMs are system builders consisting of lower-volume PC
manufacturers, which source Microsoft software for pre-installation and local redistribution primarily through the Microsoft
distributor channel rather than through a direct agreement or relationship with Microsoft.
Direct
Many organizations that license our products and services transact directly with us through Enterprise Agreements and
Enterprise Services contracts, with sales support from system integrators, independent software vendors, web agencies,
and partners that advise organizations on licensing our products and services (“Enterprise Agreement Software Advisors” or
“ESA”). Microsoft offers direct sales programs targeted to reach small, medium, and corporate customers, in addition to
those offered through the reseller channel. A large network of partner advisors support many of these sales.

===== SOURCE PAGE 23 =====
23
We also sell commercial and consumer products and services directly to customers, such as cloud services, search, and
gaming, through our digital marketplaces and online stores. Additionally, our Microsoft Experience Centers are designed to
facilitate deeper engagement with our partners and customers across industries.
 
Distributors and Resellers
Organizations also license our products and services indirectly, primarily through licensing solution partners (“LSP”),
distributors, value-added resellers (“VAR”), and retailers. Although each type of reselling partner may reach organizations of
all sizes, LSPs are primarily engaged with large organizations, distributors resell primarily to VARs, and VARs typically reach
small and medium organizations. ESAs are also typically authorized as LSPs and operate as resellers for our other volume
licensing programs. Microsoft Cloud Solution Provider is our main partner program for reselling cloud services.
We distribute our retail packaged products primarily through independent non-exclusive distributors, authorized replicators,
resellers, and retail outlets. Individual consumers obtain these products primarily through retail outlets. We distribute our
devices through third-party retailers. We have a network of field sales representatives and field support personnel that solicit
orders from distributors and resellers and provide product training and sales support.
Our Dynamics business solutions are also licensed to enterprises through a global network of channel partners providing
vertical solutions and specialized services.
LICENSING OPTIONS
We offer options for organizations of varying sizes that want to purchase our cloud services and on-premise software. We
license these organizations under volume licensing agreements to allow the customer to acquire multiple licenses of
products and services instead of having to acquire separate licenses through retail channels. These volume licensing
programs have varying programmatic requirements and benefits to best meet the needs of our customers.
Software Assurance (“SA”) conveys rights to new software and upgrades for perpetual licenses released over the contract
period. It also provides support, tools, training, and other licensing benefits to help customers deploy and use software
efficiently. SA is required to be purchased with certain volume licensing agreements and is an optional purchase with others.
Volume Licensing Programs
Enterprise Agreement
Enterprise Agreements offer large organizations a manageable volume licensing program that gives them the flexibility to
buy cloud services and software licenses under one agreement. Enterprise Agreements are designed for medium or large
organizations that want to license Microsoft products and services organization-wide over a three-year period. Organizations
can elect to purchase perpetual licenses (covered with SA) and/or subscribe to cloud services.
Microsoft Customer Agreement
Microsoft Customer Agreements are simplified purchase agreements presented, accepted, and stored through a digital
experience. Microsoft Customer Agreements are non-expiring agreements that are designed to support all customers over
time, whether purchasing through a partner or directly from Microsoft.
Microsoft Online Subscription Agreement
Microsoft Online Subscription Agreements are designed for small and medium organizations that want to subscribe to,
activate, provision, and maintain cloud services seamlessly and directly via the web. These agreements allow customers to
acquire monthly or annual subscriptions for cloud-based services.

===== SOURCE PAGE 24 =====
24
Microsoft Products and Services Agreement
Microsoft Products and Services Agreements are designed for medium and large organizations that want to license cloud
services and on-premises software as needed, with no organization-wide commitment, under a single, non-expiring
agreement. Organizations purchase perpetual licenses or subscribe to licenses. SA is optional for customers that purchase
perpetual licenses.
Open Value
Open Value agreements are a simple, cost-effective way to acquire the latest Microsoft technology. These agreements are
designed for small and medium organizations that want to license cloud services and on-premises software over a three-
year period. Under Open Value agreements, organizations can elect to purchase perpetual licenses or subscribe to licenses
and SA is included.
Select Plus
A Select Plus agreement is designed for government and academic organizations to acquire on-premises licenses at any
affiliate or department level, while realizing advantages as one organization. Organizations purchase perpetual licenses and
SA is optional.
Partner Programs
The Microsoft Cloud Solution Provider Program offers customers an easy way to license the cloud services they need in
combination with the value-added services offered by their systems integrator, managed services provider, or cloud reseller
partner. Partners in this program can easily package their own products and services to directly provision, manage, and
support their customer subscriptions.
The Microsoft Services Provider License Agreement allows hosting service providers and independent software vendors
who want to license eligible Microsoft software products to provide hosted applications and software services to their end
customers. Partners license software over a three-year period and are billed monthly based on units licensed.
The Independent Software Vendor Royalty Program enables partners to integrate Microsoft products into other applications
and then license the unified business solution to their end users.
CUSTOMERS
Our customers include individual consumers, small and medium organizations, large global enterprises, public-sector
institutions, Internet service providers, application developers, and OEMs. Our practice is to ship our products promptly upon
receipt of purchase orders from customers; consequently, backlog is not significant.
GOVERNMENT REGULATION
We are subject to a wide range of laws, regulations, and legal requirements in the U.S. and globally, including those that may
apply  to  our  products  and  online  services  offerings,  and  those  that  impose  requirements  related  to  user  privacy,
telecommunications, data storage and protection, advertising, and online content. How these laws and regulations apply to
our business is often unclear, subject to change over time, and sometimes may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction.  To  comply  with  the  accelerating  global  regulatory  obligations,  we  established  a  regulatory  governance
framework and to create a repeatable system-focused approach to regulatory governance with an initial focus on four
domains: Responsible AI, Privacy, Digital Safety, and Cybersecurity. The framework is designed to help us maintain
customer trust and confidence in our products, remain in compliance with regulators around the globe, and effectively scale
our capability to address the growing number of complex regulations. Through the framework, our legal and regulatory
subject matter experts ingest regulations, develop standards and implementation guidance, and, when appropriate, work
with our engineers to develop and implement products to monitor compliance. Our business teams, with legal support,
manage the compliance programs and prepare external regulatory and commercial reporting, and our internal audit teams
conduct reviews of our programs and processes. While we intended to create a unified approach to regulatory compliance,
some of the programs and processes established pursuant to the framework are tailored to meet specific regulatory

===== SOURCE PAGE 25 =====
25
obligations, such as with the creation of independent compliance functions required by the European Union (“EU”) Digital
Markets Act and the EU Digital Services Act, which oversee, monitor, and assess the company’s compliance with these acts.
For a description of the risks we face related to regulatory matters, refer to Risk Factors in our fiscal year 2024 Form 10-K.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
Our Internet address is www.microsoft.com. At our Investor Relations website, www.microsoft.com/investor, we make
available free of charge a variety of information for investors. Our goal is to maintain the Investor Relations website as a
portal through which investors can easily find or navigate to pertinent information about us, including:
• Our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and any
amendments to those reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file that material with or
furnish it to the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) at www.sec.gov.
• Information on our business strategies, financial results, and metrics for investors.
• Announcements of investor conferences, speeches, and events at which our executives talk about our
product, service, and competitive strategies. Archives of these events are also available.
• Press  releases  on  quarterly  earnings,  product  and  service  announcements,  legal  developments,  and
international news.
• Corporate governance information including our articles of incorporation, bylaws, governance guidelines,
committee charters, codes of conduct and ethics, global corporate social responsibility initiatives, and other
governance-related policies.
• Other news and announcements that we may post from time to time that investors might find useful or
interesting.
• Opportunities to sign up for email alerts to have information pushed in real time.
We publish a variety of reports and resources related to our Corporate Social Responsibility programs and progress on our
Reports  Hub  website,  www.microsoft.com/corporate-responsibility/reports-hub,  including  reports  on  sustainability,
responsible sourcing, accessibility, digital trust, and public policy engagement.
The information found on these websites is not part of, or incorporated by reference into, this or any other report we file with,
or furnish to, the SEC. In addition to these channels, we use social media to communicate to the public. It is possible that the
information we post on social media could be deemed to be material to investors. We encourage investors, the media, and
others interested in Microsoft to review the information we post on the social media channels listed on our Investor Relations
website.

===== SOURCE PAGE 26 =====
26
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is
intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Microsoft Corporation. MD&A is
provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and the
accompanying Notes to Financial Statements. This section generally discusses the results of our operations for the year
ended June  30, 2024 compared to the year ended June  30, 2023. For a discussion of the year ended June  30, 2023
compared to the year ended June 30, 2022, please refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 2023.
OVERVIEW
Microsoft is a technology company committed to making digital technology and artificial intelligence (“AI”) available broadly
and doing so responsibly, with a mission to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more. We
create platforms and tools, powered by AI, that deliver innovative solutions that meet the evolving needs of our customers.
We generate revenue by offering a wide range of cloud-based solutions, content, and other services to people and
businesses; licensing and supporting an array of software products; delivering relevant online advertising to a global
audience; and designing and selling devices. Our most significant expenses are related to compensating employees;
supporting and investing in our cloud-based services, including datacenter operations; designing, manufacturing, marketing,
and selling our other products and services; and income taxes.
Highlights from fiscal year 2024 compared with fiscal year 2023 included:
• Microsoft Cloud revenue increased 23% to $137.4 billion.
• Office Commercial products and cloud services revenue increased 14% driven by Office 365 Commercial
growth of 16%.
• Office  Consumer  products  and  cloud  services  revenue  increased  4%  and  Microsoft  365  Consumer
subscribers grew to 82.5 million.
• LinkedIn revenue increased 9%.
• Dynamics products and cloud services revenue increased 19% driven by Dynamics 365 growth of 24%.
• Server products and cloud services revenue increased 22% driven by Azure and other cloud services growth
of 30%.
• Windows revenue increased 8% with Windows original equipment manufacturer licensing (“Windows OEM”)
revenue growth of 7% and Windows Commercial products and cloud services revenue growth of 11%.
• Devices revenue decreased 15%.
• Xbox content and services revenue increased 50% driven by 44 points of net impact from the Activision
Blizzard Inc. (“Activision Blizzard”) acquisition. The net impact reflects the change of Activision Blizzard content
from third-party to first-party.
• Search and news advertising revenue excluding traffic acquisition costs increased 12%.
On October  13, 2023, we completed our acquisition of Activision Blizzard for a total purchase price of $75.4  billion,
consisting primarily of cash. The financial results of Activision Blizzard have been included in our consolidated financial
statements since the date of the acquisition. Activision Blizzard is reported as part of our More Personal Computing
segment. Refer to Note 8 – Business Combinations of the Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.

===== SOURCE PAGE 27 =====
27
Industry Trends
Our industry is dynamic and highly competitive, with frequent changes in both technologies and business models. Each
industry shift is an opportunity to conceive new products, new technologies, or new ideas that can further transform the
industry and our business. At Microsoft, we push the boundaries of what is possible through a broad range of research and
development activities that seek to identify and address the changing demands of customers and users, industry trends, and
competitive forces.
Economic Conditions, Challenges, and Risks
The markets for software, devices, and cloud-based services are dynamic and highly competitive. Our competitors are
developing new software and devices, while also deploying competing cloud-based services for consumers and businesses.
The devices and form factors customers prefer evolve rapidly, influencing how users access services in the cloud and, in
some cases, the user’s choice of which suite of cloud-based services to use. Aggregate demand for our software, services,
and devices is also correlated to global macroeconomic and geopolitical factors, which remain dynamic. We must continue
to evolve and adapt over an extended time in pace with this changing environment.
The investments we are making in cloud and AI infrastructure and devices will continue to increase our operating costs and
may decrease our operating margins. We continue to identify and evaluate opportunities to expand our datacenter locations
and increase our server capacity to meet the evolving needs of our customers, particularly given the growing demand for AI
services. Our datacenters depend on the availability of permitted and buildable land, predictable energy, networking
supplies, and servers, including graphics processing units (“GPUs”) and other components. Our devices are primarily
manufactured by third-party contract manufacturers. For the majority of our products, we have the ability to use other
manufacturers if a current vendor becomes unavailable or unable to meet our requirements. However, some of our products
contain certain components for which there are very few qualified suppliers. Extended disruptions at these suppliers could
impact our ability to manufacture devices on time to meet consumer demand.
Our success is highly dependent on our ability to attract and retain qualified employees. We hire a mix of university and
industry talent worldwide. We compete for talented individuals globally by offering an exceptional working environment,
broad customer reach, scale in resources, the ability to grow one’s career across many different products and businesses,
and competitive compensation and benefits.
Our international operations provide a significant portion of our total revenue and expenses. Many of these revenue and
expenses are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. As a result, changes in foreign exchange rates may
significantly affect revenue and expenses. Fluctuations in the U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies did not have a
material impact on reported revenue and expenses from our international operations in fiscal year 2024.
Refer to Risk Factors in our fiscal year 2024 Form 10-K for a discussion of these factors and other risks.
Seasonality
Our revenue fluctuates quarterly and is generally higher in the fourth quarter of our fiscal year. Fourth quarter revenue is
driven by a higher volume of multi-year contracts executed during the period.
Change in Accounting Estimate
In July 2022, we completed an assessment of the useful lives of our server and network equipment. Due to investments in
software that increased efficiencies in how we operate our server and network equipment, as well as advances in
technology, we determined we should increase the estimated useful lives of both server and network equipment from four
years to six years. This change in accounting estimate was effective beginning fiscal year 2023.

===== SOURCE PAGE 28 =====
28
Reportable Segments
We report our financial performance based on the following segments: Productivity and Business Processes, Intelligent
Cloud, and More Personal Computing. The segment amounts included in MD&A are presented on a basis consistent with
our internal management reporting.
Additional information on our reportable segments is contained in Note 19 – Segment Information and Geographic Data of
the Notes to Financial Statements.
Metrics
We use metrics in assessing the performance of our business and to make informed decisions regarding the allocation of
resources. We disclose metrics to enable investors to evaluate progress against our ambitions, provide transparency into
performance trends, and reflect the continued evolution of our products and services. Our commercial and other business
metrics are fundamentally connected based on how customers use our products and services. The metrics are disclosed in
the MD&A or the Notes to Financial Statements. Financial metrics are calculated based on financial results prepared in
accordance  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America  (“GAAP”),  and  growth
comparisons relate to the corresponding period of last fiscal year.
In the first quarter of fiscal year 2024, we made updates to the presentation and method of calculation for certain metrics,
revising our Microsoft Cloud revenue metric to include revenue growth and expanding our Microsoft 365 Consumer
subscribers metric to include Microsoft 365 Basic subscribers, aligning with how we manage our business.
Commercial
Our  commercial  business  primarily  consists  of  Server  products  and  cloud  services,  Office  Commercial,  Windows
Commercial, the commercial portion of LinkedIn, Enterprise and partner services, and Dynamics. Our commercial metrics
allow management and investors to assess the overall health of our commercial business and include leading indicators of
future performance.
 
Commercial remaining performance obligation Commercial  portion  of  revenue  allocated  to  remaining
performance obligations, which includes unearned revenue
and  amounts  that  will  be  invoiced  and  recognized  as
revenue in future periods   
Microsoft Cloud revenue and revenue growth Revenue from Azure and other cloud services, Office 365
Commercial, the commercial portion of LinkedIn, Dynamics
365, and other commercial cloud properties   
Microsoft Cloud gross margin percentage Gross margin percentage for our Microsoft Cloud business

===== SOURCE PAGE 29 =====
29
Productivity and Business Processes and Intelligent Cloud
Metrics related to our Productivity and Business Processes and Intelligent Cloud segments assess the health of our core
businesses within these segments. The metrics reflect our cloud and on-premises product strategies and trends.
    
Office Commercial products and cloud services revenue
growth
Revenue  from  Office  Commercial  products  and  cloud
services (Office 365 subscriptions, the Office 365 portion of
Microsoft  365  Commercial  subscriptions,  and  Office
licensed  on-premises),  comprising  Office,  Exchange,
SharePoint,  Microsoft  Teams,  Office  365  Security  and
Compliance, Microsoft Viva, and Copilot for Microsoft 365
Office Consumer products and cloud services revenue
growth
Revenue  from  Office  Consumer  products  and  cloud
services, including Microsoft 365 Consumer and Copilot
Pro subscriptions, Office licensed on-premises, and other
Office services   
Office 365 Commercial seat growth The number of Office 365 Commercial seats at end of
period where seats are paid users covered by an Office 365
Commercial subscription   
Microsoft 365 Consumer subscribers The number of Microsoft 365 Consumer and Copilot Pro
subscribers at end of period   
Dynamics products and cloud services revenue growth Revenue  from  Dynamics  products  and  cloud  services,
including Dynamics 365, comprising a set of intelligent,
cloud-based applications across ERP, CRM, Power Apps,
and Power Automate; and on-premises ERP and CRM
applications   
LinkedIn revenue growth Revenue  from  LinkedIn,  including  Talent  Solutions,
Marketing  Solutions,  Premium Subscriptions,  and Sales
Solutions   
Server products and cloud services revenue growth Revenue  from  Server  products  and  cloud  services,
including  Azure  and  other  cloud  services;  SQL  Server,
Windows Server, Visual Studio, System Center, and related
Client Access Licenses (“CALs”); and Nuance and GitHub

===== SOURCE PAGE 30 =====
30
More Personal Computing
Metrics related to our More Personal Computing segment assess the performance of key lines of business within this
segment. These metrics provide strategic product insights which allow us to assess the performance across our commercial
and consumer businesses. As we have diversity of target audiences and sales motions within the Windows business, we
monitor metrics that are reflective of those varying motions.
 
Windows OEM revenue growth Revenue from sales of Windows Pro and non-Pro licenses
sold through the OEM channel   
Windows Commercial products and cloud services
revenue growth
Revenue from Windows Commercial products and cloud
services,  comprising  volume  licensing  of  the  Windows
operating  system,  Windows  cloud  services,  and  other
Windows commercial offerings   
Devices revenue growth Revenue from Devices, including Surface, HoloLens, and
PC accessories   
Xbox content and services revenue growth Revenue from Xbox content and services, comprising first-
party content (such as Activision Blizzard) and third-party
content, including games and in-game content; Xbox Game
Pass  and  other  subscriptions;  Xbox  Cloud  Gaming;
advertising;  third-party  disc  royalties;  and  other  cloud
services   
Search and news advertising revenue (ex TAC) growth Revenue  from  search  and  news  advertising  excluding
traffic acquisition costs (“TAC”) paid to Bing Ads network
publishers and news partners
 
SUMMARY RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
 
(In millions, except percentages and per share amounts) 2024 2023
Percentage
Change        
Revenue $  245,122 $  211,915 16%
Gross margin 171,008 146,052 17%
Operating income 109,433 88,523 24%
Net income 88,136 72,361 22%
Diluted earnings per share 11.80 9.68 22%       
Adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) 171,008 146,204 17%
Adjusted operating income (non-GAAP) 109,433 89,694 22%
Adjusted net income (non-GAAP) 88,136 73,307 20%
Adjusted diluted earnings per share (non-GAAP) 11.80 9.81 20% 
Adjusted gross margin, operating income, net income, and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) are non-GAAP financial
measures. Prior year non-GAAP financial measures exclude the impact of a $1.2  billion charge in the second quarter of
fiscal year 2023 (“Q2 charge”), which included employee severance expenses, impairment charges resulting from changes
to our hardware portfolio, and costs related to lease consolidation activities. Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures
section below for a reconciliation of our financial results reported in accordance with GAAP to non-GAAP financial results.
Fiscal Year 2024 Compared with Fiscal Year 2023
Revenue increased $33.2 billion or 16% driven by growth across each of our segments. Intelligent Cloud revenue increased
driven by Azure. Productivity and Business Processes revenue increased driven by Office 365 Commercial. More Personal
Computing revenue increased driven by Gaming.
Cost of revenue increased $8.3 billion or 13% driven by growth in Microsoft Cloud and Gaming, offset in part by a decline in
Devices.

===== SOURCE PAGE 31 =====
31
Gross margin increased $25.0 billion or 17% driven by growth across each of our segments.
• Gross margin percentage increased slightly. Excluding the impact of the change in accounting estimate for
the useful lives of our server and network equipment, gross margin percentage increased 2 points driven by
improvement in More Personal Computing.
• Microsoft Cloud gross margin percentage decreased slightly to 71%. Excluding the impact of the change in
accounting estimate, Microsoft Cloud gross margin percentage increased slightly driven by improvements in
Azure and Office 365 Commercial, inclusive of scaling our AI infrastructure, offset in part by sales mix shift to
Azure.
Operating expenses increased $4.0  billion or 7% driven by Gaming, with 7 points of growth from the Activision Blizzard
acquisition, and investments in cloud engineering, offset in part by the prior year Q2 charge.
Operating income increased $20.9 billion or 24% driven by growth across each of our segments.
Prior year gross margin, operating income, net income, and diluted EPS were negatively impacted by the Q2 charge, which
resulted in decreases of $152 million, $1.2 billion, $946 million, and $0.13, respectively.
 
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
 
(In millions, except percentages) 2024 2023
Percentage
Change        
Revenue             
Productivity and Business Processes $ 77,728 $ 69,274 12%
Intelligent Cloud 105,362 87,907 20%
More Personal Computing 62,032 54,734 13%     
Total $  245,122 $  211,915 16%              
Operating Income             
Productivity and Business Processes $ 40,540 $ 34,189 19%
Intelligent Cloud 49,584 37,884 31%
More Personal Computing 19,309 16,450 17%     
Total $ 109,433 $ 88,523 24%       
Reportable Segments
Fiscal Year 2024 Compared with Fiscal Year 2023
Productivity and Business Processes
Revenue increased $8.5 billion or 12%.
• Office Commercial products and cloud services revenue increased $5.8 billion or 14%. Office 365 Commercial
revenue grew 16% with seat growth of 7%, driven by small and medium business and frontline worker offerings,
as well as growth in revenue per user. Office Commercial products revenue declined 16% driven by continued
customer shift to cloud offerings.
• Office Consumer products and cloud services revenue increased $237 million or 4%. Microsoft 365 Consumer
subscribers grew 10% to 82.5 million.
• LinkedIn revenue increased $1.4 billion or 9% driven by growth across all lines of business – Talent Solutions,
Premium Subscriptions, Marketing Solutions, and Sales Solutions.
• Dynamics products and cloud services revenue increased $1.0  billion or 19% driven by Dynamics 365.
Dynamics 365 revenue grew 24% driven by growth across all workloads.

===== SOURCE PAGE 32 =====
32
Operating income increased $6.4 billion or 19%.
• Gross margin increased  $6.5 billion or 12%  driven  by  growth  in  Office  365  Commercial.  Gross  margin
percentage decreased slightly. Excluding the impact of the change in accounting estimate, gross margin
percentage increased slightly driven by improvement in Office 365 Commercial.
• Operating expenses increased $159 million or 1%.
Intelligent Cloud
Revenue increased $17.5 billion or 20%.
• Server products and cloud services revenue increased $17.8  billion or 22% driven by Azure and other cloud
services. Azure and other cloud services revenue grew 30% driven by growth in our consumption-based
services. Server products revenue increased 3% driven by continued demand for our hybrid solutions, including
Windows Server and SQL Server running in multi-cloud environments.
• Enterprise and partner services revenue decreased $306 million or 4% driven by declines in Enterprise Support
Services and Industry Solutions.
 
Operating income increased $11.7 billion or 31%.
• Gross margin increased $11.6 billion or 19% driven by growth in Azure. Gross margin percentage decreased
slightly. Excluding the impact of the change in accounting estimate, gross margin percentage increased slightly
primarily driven by improvement in Azure, inclusive of scaling our AI infrastructure, offset in part by sales mix
shift to Azure.
• Operating  expenses  decreased  slightly  primarily  driven  by  the  prior  year  Q2  charge,  offset  in  part  by
investments in Azure.
More Personal Computing
Revenue increased $7.3 billion or 13%.
• Windows revenue increased $1.7 billion or 8% driven by growth in Windows Commercial and Windows OEM.
Windows Commercial products and cloud services revenue increased 11% driven by demand for Microsoft 365.
Windows OEM revenue increased 7%.
• Gaming revenue increased $6.0 billion or 39% driven by growth in Xbox content and services. Xbox content and
services revenue increased 50% driven by 44 points of net impact from the Activision Blizzard acquisition. Xbox
hardware revenue decreased 13% driven by lower volume of consoles sold.
• Search and news advertising revenue increased $418  million or 3%. Search and news advertising revenue
excluding traffic acquisition costs increased 12% driven by higher search volume.
• Devices revenue decreased $815 million or 15%.
Operating income increased $2.9 billion or 17%.
• Gross margin increased $6.8 billion or 23% driven by growth in Gaming, with 10 points of net impact from the
Activision Blizzard acquisition, as well as growth in Windows. Gross margin percentage increased driven by
sales mix shift to higher margin businesses and improvement in Devices.
• Operating expenses increased $3.9  billion or 31% driven by Gaming, with 34 points of growth from the
Activision Blizzard acquisition.

===== SOURCE PAGE 33 =====
33
OPERATING EXPENSES
Research and Development
 
(In millions, except percentages) 2024 2023
Percentage
Change        
Research and development $   29,510  $   27,195  9%
As a percent of revenue 12%  13%  (1)ppt 
Research and development expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and other
headcount-related expenses associated with product development. Research and development expenses also include third-
party development and programming costs and the amortization of purchased software code and services content.
Fiscal Year 2024 Compared with Fiscal Year 2023
Research and development expenses increased $2.3  billion or 9% driven by Gaming, with 7 points of growth from the
Activision Blizzard acquisition, and investments in cloud engineering.
 
Sales and Marketing
 
(In millions, except percentages) 2024 2023
Percentage
Change        
Sales and marketing $   24,456  $   22,759  7%
As a percent of revenue 10%  11%  (1)ppt 
Sales  and  marketing  expenses  include  payroll,  employee  benefits,  stock-based  compensation  expense,  and  other
headcount-related expenses associated with sales and marketing personnel, and the costs of advertising, promotions, trade
shows, seminars, and other programs.
Fiscal Year 2024 Compared with Fiscal Year 2023
Sales and marketing expenses increased $1.7  billion or 7% driven by Gaming, with 6 points of growth from the Activision
Blizzard acquisition.
General and Administrative
 
(In millions, except percentages) 2024 2023
Percentage
Change        
General and administrative $   7,609  $   7,575  0%
As a percent of revenue 3%  4%  (1)ppt 
General and administrative expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, employee
severance expense incurred as part of a corporate program, and other headcount-related expenses associated with finance,
legal,  facilities,  certain  human  resources  and  other  administrative  personnel,  certain  taxes,  and  legal  and  other
administrative fees.
Fiscal Year 2024 Compared with Fiscal Year 2023
General and administrative expenses increased slightly as growth from the Activision Blizzard acquisition was offset in part
by the prior year Q2 charge.

===== SOURCE PAGE 34 =====
34
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET
The components of other income (expense), net were as follows:
 
(In millions)          
Year Ended June 30, 2024 2023     
Interest and dividends income $    3,157 $    2,994
Interest expense (2,935
)
(1,968
)
Net recognized gains (losses) on investments (118
) 260
Net losses on derivatives (187
)
(456
)
Net gains (losses) on foreign currency remeasurements (244
) 181
Other, net (1,319
)
(223
)   
Total $ (1,646
) $ 788     
We use derivative instruments to manage risks related to foreign currencies, interest rates, equity prices, and credit; to
enhance investment returns; and to facilitate portfolio diversification. Gains and losses from changes in fair values of
derivatives that are not designated as hedging instruments are primarily recognized in other income (expense), net.
 
Fiscal Year 2024 Compared with Fiscal Year 2023
Interest and dividends income increased due to higher yields. Interest expense increased due to the issuance of commercial
paper. Net recognized losses on investments increased primarily due to higher equity impairments and lower gains on equity
investments. Net losses on derivatives decreased primarily due to lower losses on equity derivatives. Other, net primarily
reflects net recognized losses on equity method investments.
INCOME TAXES
Effective Tax Rate
Our effective tax rate for fiscal years 2024 and 2023 was 18% and 19%, respectively. The decrease in our effective tax rate
was primarily due to tax benefits from tax law changes, including the impact from the issuance of Notice 2023-55 and Notice
2023-80 by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and U.S. Treasury Department. Notice 2023-55, issued in the first quarter
of fiscal year 2024, delayed the effective date of final foreign tax credit regulations to fiscal year 2024 for Microsoft. Notice
2023-80, issued in the second quarter of fiscal year 2024, further delayed the effective date of final foreign tax credit
regulations indefinitely.
Our effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate, primarily due to earnings taxed at lower rates in foreign
jurisdictions resulting from producing and distributing our products and services through our foreign regional operations
center in Ireland.
The mix of income before income taxes between the U.S. and foreign countries impacted our effective tax rate as a result of
the geographic distribution of, and customer demand for, our products and services. In fiscal year 2024, our U.S. income
before income taxes was $62.9 billion and our foreign income before income taxes was $44.9 billion. In fiscal year 2023, our
U.S. income before income taxes was $52.9 billion and our foreign income before income taxes was $36.4 billion.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (“OECD”) published its model rules “Tax Challenges Arising
From the Digitalisation of the Economy – Global Anti-Base Erosion Model Rules (Pillar Two)” which established a global
minimum corporate tax rate of 15% for certain multinational enterprises. Many countries have implemented or are in the
process of implementing the Pillar Two legislation, which will apply to Microsoft beginning in fiscal year 2025. While we do

===== SOURCE PAGE 35 =====
35
not currently estimate a material impact to our consolidated financial statements, we continue to monitor the impact as
countries implement legislation and the OECD provides additional guidance.
Uncertain Tax Positions
We remain under audit by the IRS for tax years 2014 to 2017. With respect to the audit for tax years 2004 to 2013, on
September 26, 2023, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustment (“NOPAs”) from the IRS. The primary issues in the
NOPAs relate to intercompany transfer pricing. In the NOPAs, the IRS is seeking an additional tax payment of $28.9 billion
plus penalties and interest. As of June 30, 2024, we believe our allowances for income tax contingencies are adequate. We
disagree with the proposed adjustments and will vigorously contest the NOPAs through the IRS’s administrative appeals
office and, if necessary, judicial proceedings. We do not expect a final resolution of these issues in the next 12 months.
Based on the information currently available, we do not anticipate a significant increase or decrease to our income tax
contingencies for these issues within the next 12 months.
We are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions outside the U.S. Our operations in certain jurisdictions remain subject to
examination for tax years 1996 to 2023, some of which are currently under audit by local tax authorities. The resolution of
each of these audits is not expected to be material to our consolidated financial statements.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted gross margin, operating income, net income, and diluted EPS are non-GAAP financial measures. Prior year non-
GAAP financial measures exclude the impact of the Q2 charge, which includes employee severance expenses, impairment
charges resulting from changes to our hardware portfolio, and costs related to lease consolidation activities. We believe
these non-GAAP measures aid investors by providing additional insight into our operational performance and help clarify
trends affecting our business. For comparability of reporting, management considers non-GAAP measures in conjunction
with GAAP financial results in evaluating business performance. These non-GAAP financial measures presented should not
be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The following table reconciles our financial results reported in accordance with GAAP to non-GAAP financial results:
 
(In millions, except percentages and per share amounts) 2024 2023
Percentage
Change 
Gross margin $ 171,008 $ 146,052 17%
Severance, hardware-related impairment, and lease consolidation costs 0 152 *     
Adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) $  171,008 $   146,204 17%              
Operating income $ 109,433 $ 88,523 24%
Severance, hardware-related impairment, and lease consolidation costs 0 1,171 *     
Adjusted operating income (non-GAAP) $ 109,433 $ 89,694 22%              
Net income $ 88,136 $ 72,361 22%
Severance, hardware-related impairment, and lease consolidation costs 0 946 *     
Adjusted net income (non-GAAP) $ 88,136 $ 73,307 20%              
Diluted earnings per share $ 11.80 $ 9.68 22%
Severance, hardware-related impairment, and lease consolidation costs 0 0.13 *     
Adjusted diluted earnings per share (non-GAAP) $ 11.80 $ 9.81 20%       
* Not meaningful.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We expect existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash flows from operations, and access to capital
markets to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing
activities, such as dividends, share repurchases, debt maturities, material capital expenditures, and the transition tax related
to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”), for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.

===== SOURCE PAGE 36 =====
36
Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Investments
Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $75.5 billion and $111.3 billion as of June 30, 2024 and 2023,
respectively. Equity and other investments were $14.6  billion and $9.9 billion as of June 30, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
Our short-term investments are primarily intended to facilitate liquidity and capital preservation. They consist predominantly
of  highly  liquid  investment-grade  fixed-income  securities,  diversified  among  industries  and  individual  issuers.  The
investments are predominantly U.S. dollar-denominated securities, but also include foreign currency-denominated securities
to diversify risk. Our fixed-income investments are exposed to interest rate risk and credit risk. The credit risk and average
maturity of our fixed-income portfolio are managed to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain fixed-income
indices. The settlement risk related to these investments is insignificant given that the short-term investments held are
primarily highly liquid investment-grade fixed-income securities.
Valuation
In general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities to determine the fair
value of our financial instruments. This pricing methodology applies to our Level  1 investments, such as U.S. government
securities, common and preferred stock, and mutual funds. If quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or inputs other than the
quoted prices that are observable either directly or indirectly. This pricing methodology applies to our Level  2 investments,
such as commercial paper, certificates of deposit, U.S. agency securities, foreign government bonds, mortgage- and asset-
backed securities, corporate notes and bonds, and municipal securities. Level  3 investments are valued using internally-
developed models with unobservable inputs. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis using
unobservable inputs are an immaterial portion of our portfolio.
A majority of our investments are priced by pricing vendors and are generally Level  1 or Level  2 investments as these
vendors either provide a quoted market price in an active market or use observable inputs for their pricing without applying
significant adjustments. Broker pricing is used mainly when a quoted price is not available, the investment is not priced by
our pricing vendors, or when a broker price is more reflective of fair values in the market in which the investment trades. Our
broker-priced investments are generally classified as Level  2 investments because the broker prices these investments
based on similar assets without applying significant adjustments. In addition, all our broker-priced investments have a
sufficient level of trading volume to demonstrate that the fair values used are appropriate for these investments. Our fair
value processes include controls that are designed to ensure appropriate fair values are recorded. These controls include
model validation, review of key model inputs, analysis of period-over-period fluctuations, and independent recalculation of
prices where appropriate.
Cash Flows
Cash from operations increased $31.0  billion to $118.5  billion for fiscal year 2024, primarily due to an increase in cash
received from customers. Cash used in financing decreased $6.2 billion to $37.8 billion for fiscal year 2024, primarily due to
a $5.0 billion decrease in common stock repurchases and a $3.3 billion increase in proceeds from issuance of debt, net of
repayments, offset in part by a $2.0  billion increase in dividends paid. Cash used in investing increased $74.3  billion to
$97.0 billion for fiscal year 2024, primarily due to a $67.5 billion increase in cash used for acquisitions of companies, net of
cash acquired, and purchases of intangible and other assets and a $16.4  billion increase in additions to property and
equipment.
Debt Proceeds
We issue debt to take advantage of favorable pricing and liquidity in the debt markets, reflecting our credit rating. The
proceeds of these issuances were or will be used for general corporate purposes, which may include, among other things,
funding for working capital, capital expenditures, repurchases of capital stock, acquisitions, and repayment of existing debt.
Refer to Note 11 – Debt of the Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.
Unearned Revenue
Unearned revenue comprises mainly unearned revenue related to volume licensing programs, which may include Software
Assurance (“SA”) and cloud services. Unearned revenue is generally invoiced annually at the beginning of each contract
period for multi-year agreements and recognized ratably over the coverage period. Unearned revenue also includes

===== SOURCE PAGE 37 =====
37
payments for other offerings for which we have been paid in advance and earn the revenue when we transfer control of the
product or service. Refer to Note 1 – Accounting Policies of the Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.
The following table outlines the expected future recognition of unearned revenue as of June 30, 2024:
 
(In millions)      
Three Months Ending     
September 30, 2024 $ 22,529
December 31, 2024 17,664
March 31, 2025 12,076
June 30, 2025 5,313
Thereafter 2,602 
Total $   60,184   
 
If our customers choose to license cloud-based versions of our products and services rather than licensing transaction-
based products and services, the associated revenue will shift from being recognized at the time of the transaction to being
recognized over the subscription period or upon consumption, as applicable. Refer to Note 13 – Unearned Revenue of the
Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.
Material Cash Requirements and Other Obligations
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the payments due by fiscal year for our outstanding contractual obligations as of June  30,
2024:
 
(In millions) 2025 Thereafter Total        
Long-term debt: (a)
     
Principal payments $ 2,250 $ 48,971 $ 51,221
Interest payments 1,618 27,041 28,659
Construction commitments (b) 29,892 5,499 35,391
Operating and finance leases, including imputed interest (c) 12,250 160,475 172,725
Purchase commitments (d) 68,280 3,742 72,022     
Total $   114,290 $   245,728 $   360,018       
(a) Refer to Note 11 – Debt of the Notes to Financial Statements.
(b) Refer to Note 7 – Property and Equipment of the Notes to Financial Statements.
(c) Refer to Note 14 – Leases of the Notes to Financial Statements.
(d) Purchase commitments primarily relate to datacenters and include open purchase orders and take-or-pay contracts
that are not presented as construction commitments above.
Income Taxes
As a result of the TCJA, we are required to pay a one-time transition tax on deferred foreign income not previously subject to
U.S. income tax. Under the TCJA, the transition tax is payable in interest-free installments over eight years, with 8% due in
each of the first five years, 15% in year six, 20% in year seven, and 25% in year eight. As of June  30, 2024, we had a
remaining transition tax liability of $7.6 billion, of which $3.8 billion is short-term and payable in the first quarter of fiscal year
2025.

===== SOURCE PAGE 38 =====
38
Share Repurchases
During fiscal years 2024 and 2023, we repurchased 32  million shares and 69  million shares of our common stock for
$12.0 billion and $18.4 billion, respectively, through our share repurchase program. All repurchases were made using cash
resources. As of June  30, 2024, $10.3  billion remained of our $60  billion share repurchase program. Refer to Note 16 –
Stockholders’ Equity of the Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.
Dividends
During fiscal years 2024 and 2023, our Board of Directors declared dividends totaling $22.3  billion and $20.2  billion,
respectively. We intend to continue returning capital to shareholders in the form of dividends, subject to declaration by our
Board of Directors. Refer to Note 16 – Stockholders’ Equity of the Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.
Other Planned Uses of Capital
We  will  continue  to invest  in sales, marketing, product support  infrastructure,  and existing and advanced areas of
technology, as well as acquisitions that align with our business strategy. Additions to property and equipment will continue,
including new facilities, datacenters, and computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, support,
and administrative staff. We expect capital expenditures to increase in coming years to support growth in our cloud offerings
and our investments in AI infrastructure and training. We have operating and finance leases for datacenters, corporate
offices, research and development facilities, Microsoft Experience Centers, and certain equipment. We have not engaged in
any related party transactions or arrangements with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to
materially affect liquidity or the availability of capital resources.
RECENT ACCOUNTING GUIDANCE
Refer to Note 1 – Accounting Policies of the Notes to Financial Statements for further discussion.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our consolidated  financial  statements and accompanying notes are  prepared in accordance  with GAAP.  Preparing
consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported
amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Critical accounting estimates are those estimates that involve a
significant level of estimation uncertainty and could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
We have critical accounting estimates in the areas of revenue recognition, impairment of investment securities, goodwill,
research and development costs, legal and other contingencies, income taxes, and business combinations – valuation of
intangible assets.
Revenue Recognition
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining
whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately
versus together may require significant judgment. When a cloud-based service includes both on-premises software licenses
and cloud services, judgment is required to determine whether the software license is considered distinct and accounted for
separately, or not distinct and accounted for together with the cloud service and recognized over time. Certain cloud
services, primarily Office 365, depend on a significant level of integration, interdependency, and interrelation between the
desktop applications and cloud services, and are accounted for together as one performance obligation. Revenue from
Office 365 is recognized ratably over the period in which the cloud services are provided.
Judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each distinct performance obligation. We use a
single amount to estimate SSP for items that are not sold separately, including on-premises licenses sold with SA or software
updates provided at no additional charge. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP when we sell each of the products
and services separately and need to determine whether there is a discount to be allocated based on the relative SSP of the
various products and services.

===== SOURCE PAGE 39 =====
39
In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the product or service separately, we
determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. We typically have
more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by customers
and circumstances. In these instances, we may use information such as the size of the customer and geographic region in
determining the SSP.
Due to the various benefits from and the nature of our SA program, judgment is required to assess the pattern of delivery,
including the exercise pattern of certain benefits across our portfolio of customers.
Our products are generally sold with a right of return, we may provide other credits or incentives, and in certain instances we
estimate customer usage of our products and services, which are accounted for as variable consideration when determining
the amount of revenue to recognize. Returns and credits are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each
reporting period if additional information becomes available. Changes to our estimated variable consideration were not
material for the periods presented.
 
Impairment of Investment Securities
We review debt investments quarterly for credit losses and impairment. If the cost of an investment exceeds its fair value, we
evaluate, among other factors, general market conditions, credit quality of debt instrument issuers, and the extent to which
the fair value is less than cost. This determination requires significant judgment. In making this judgment, we employ a
systematic methodology that considers available quantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of
our investments. In addition, we consider specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of, and business outlook
for, the investee. If we have plans to sell the security or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security
before recovery, then a decline in fair value below cost is recorded as an impairment charge in other income (expense), net
and a new cost basis in the investment is established. If market, industry, and/or investee conditions deteriorate, we may
incur future impairments.
Equity investments without readily determinable fair values are written down to fair value if a qualitative assessment
indicates that the investment is impaired and the fair value of the investment is less than carrying value. We perform a
qualitative assessment on a periodic basis. We are required to estimate the fair value of the investment to determine the
amount of the impairment loss. Once an investment is determined to be impaired, an impairment charge is recorded in other
income (expense), net.
Goodwill
We allocate goodwill to reporting units based on the reporting unit expected to benefit from the business combination. We
evaluate our reporting units on an annual basis and, if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation
approach. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating
segment) on an annual basis (May 1) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more
likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. These events or circumstances could include
a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or
disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of
assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each
reporting unit. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated primarily through the use of a discounted cash flow
methodology. This analysis requires significant judgments, including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on
internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business, estimation of the useful life over which cash
flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital.
The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market
conditions, and other factors. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair
value and goodwill impairment for each reporting unit.

===== SOURCE PAGE 40 =====
40
Research and Development Costs
Costs incurred internally in researching and developing a computer software product are charged to expense until
technological feasibility has been established for the product. Once technological feasibility is established, software costs
are capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. Judgment is required in determining when
technological feasibility of a product is established. We have determined that technological feasibility for our software
products is reached after all high-risk development issues have been resolved through coding and testing. Generally, this
occurs shortly before the products are released to production. The amortization of these costs is included in cost of revenue
over the estimated life of the products.
 
Legal and Other Contingencies  
The outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against us are subject to significant uncertainty. An estimated loss
from a loss contingency such as a legal proceeding or claim is accrued by a charge to income if it is probable that an asset
has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. In determining
whether a loss should be accrued we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome
and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. Changes in these factors could materially impact our
consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current
year, and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an
entity’s financial statements or tax returns. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely
than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the
position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest
benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Accounting literature also provides
guidance on derecognition of income tax assets and liabilities, classification of deferred income tax assets and liabilities,
accounting for interest and penalties associated with tax positions, and income tax disclosures. Judgment is required in
assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax
returns. Variations in the actual outcome of these future tax consequences could materially impact our consolidated financial
statements.
Business Combinations – Valuation of Intangible Assets
Accounting for business combinations requires significant judgments when allocating the purchase price to the estimated
fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Determination of fair value involves estimates
and assumptions which can be complex, most notably with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates used in the
valuation of intangible assets include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of projected cash flows, useful lives, and
discount rates. While management’s estimates of fair value are based on assumptions that are believed to be reasonable,
these assumptions are inherently uncertain as they pertain to forward-looking views of our business and market conditions.
The judgments made in this valuation process could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.

===== SOURCE PAGE 41 =====
41
STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Management is responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements and related information that are
presented in this report. The consolidated financial statements, which include amounts based on management’s estimates
and judgments, have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
The  Company designs and maintains  accounting  and  internal  control systems to  provide reasonable  assurance  at
reasonable cost that assets are safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use or disposition, and that the financial records
are reliable for preparing consolidated financial statements and maintaining accountability for assets. These systems are
augmented by written policies, an organizational structure providing division of responsibilities, careful selection and training
of qualified personnel, and a program of internal audits.
The Company engaged Deloitte  & Touche LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, to audit and render an
opinion on the consolidated financial statements and internal control over financial reporting in accordance with the
standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
The Board of Directors, through its Audit Committee, consisting solely of independent directors of the Company, meets
periodically with management, internal auditors, and our independent registered public accounting firm to ensure that each
is meeting its responsibilities and to discuss matters concerning internal controls and financial reporting. Deloitte & Touche
LLP and the internal auditors each have full and free access to the Audit Committee.
Satya Nadella
Chief Executive Officer
Amy E. Hood
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Alice L. Jolla
Corporate Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer

===== SOURCE PAGE 42 =====
42
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
RISKS
We are exposed to economic risk from foreign exchange rates, interest rates, credit risk, and equity prices. We use
derivatives instruments to manage these risks, however, they may still impact our consolidated financial statements.
Foreign Currencies
Certain forecasted transactions, assets, and liabilities are exposed to foreign currency risk. We monitor our foreign currency
exposures daily to maximize the economic effectiveness of our foreign currency positions, including hedges. Principal
currency exposures include the Euro, Japanese yen, British pound, Canadian dollar, and Australian dollar.
Interest Rate
Securities held in our fixed-income portfolio are subject to different interest rate risks based on their maturities. We manage
the average maturity of the fixed-income portfolio to achieve economic returns that correlate to certain global fixed-income
indices.
Credit
Our fixed-income portfolio is diversified and consists primarily of investment-grade securities. We manage credit exposures
relative to broad-based indices to facilitate portfolio diversification.
Equity
Securities held in our equity investments portfolio are subject to price risk.
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
The following table sets forth the potential loss in future earnings or fair values, including associated derivatives, resulting
from hypothetical changes in relevant market rates or prices:
 
(In millions)              
Risk Categories Hypothetical Change
June 30,
2024 Impact       
Foreign currency – Revenue
10% decrease in foreign exchange rates
$  (9,605
) Earnings
Foreign currency – Investments
10% decrease in foreign exchange rates
(38
) Fair Value
Interest rate
100 basis point increase in U.S. treasury interest rates
(1,343
) Fair Value
Credit
100 basis point increase in credit spreads
(318
) Fair Value
Equity
10% decrease in equity market prices
(1,078
) Earnings

===== SOURCE PAGE 43 =====
43
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
INCOME STATEMENTS
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)              
Year Ended June 30, 2024 2023 2022       
Revenue:      
Product $   64,773 $  64,699 $   72,732
Service and other 180,349 147,216 125,538     
Total revenue 245,122 211,915 198,270     
Cost of revenue:      
Product 15,272 17,804 19,064
Service and other 58,842 48,059 43,586     
Total cost of revenue 74,114 65,863 62,650     
Gross margin 171,008 146,052 135,620
Research and development 29,510 27,195 24,512
Sales and marketing 24,456 22,759 21,825
General and administrative 7,609 7,575 5,900     
Operating income 109,433 88,523 83,383
Other income (expense), net (1,646
) 788 333     
Income before income taxes 107,787 89,311 83,716
Provision for income taxes 19,651 16,950 10,978     
Net income $ 88,136 $ 72,361 $ 72,738              
Earnings per share:      
Basic $ 11.86 $ 9.72 $ 9.70
Diluted $ 11.80 $ 9.68 $ 9.65       
Weighted average shares outstanding:      
Basic 7,431 7,446 7,496
Diluted 7,469 7,472 7,540 
Refer to accompanying notes.
