# NARA-CAP
Source file: capstone-final-white-paper1.pdf
Source type: uploaded_pdf
Page numbering note: Microsoft pages are labeled by the report's printed page number; extracted PDF page = printed page + 1. NARA PDFs use the PDF page number.

===== SOURCE PAGE 3 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

3 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This white paper helps explain the process and decisions leading to the development of a General
Records Schedule (GRS) for Email Managed under a Capstone Approach, as well as providing
additional contextual information and detail not included in the typical appraisal report. The
Capstone Approach offers agencies the option of using a more simplified and automated approach
to managing email that allows for the categorization and scheduling of email based on the work
and/or position of the email account owner.

The benefits of the Capstone approach are:

 Increasing the amount of email of permanent value transferred to NARA,
 Reducing the burden on individual end-users within agencies,
 Reducing reliance on print-and-file practices, and
 Allowing for systematic destruction of temporary email based on an approved NARA
disposition authority, reducing the amount of email that has no further value being stored
by agencies.

===== SOURCE PAGE 4 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

4 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
SECTION 1: BACKGROUND Information

The National Archives and Permanent Records
NARA’s mission1 is to provide public access to Federal Government records in our custody and
control. Public access to Government records strengthens democracy by allowing Americans to
claim their rights of citizenship, hold their government accountable, and understand their history
so they can participate more effectively in their government.

The Archivist of the United States determines which federal records warrant permanent
preservation and should be transferred to the National Archives for preservation and public
access. The decision as to which records are permanent is made through the
scheduling2 and
appraisal3 process. Agencies cannot destroy Federal records without the approval of the Archivist
of the United States. The Federal Records Act gives the Archivist the authority to determine the
retention and disposition of federal records (44 U.S.C Chapters 21, 29, and 33). Authority for the
transfer of records with archival value into NARA’s legal custody is outlined in 44 U.S.C. Chapters
21 and 29.

Not all records possess permanent archival value. NARA estimates that less than five percent (5%)
of records across the Federal Government require permanent retention and should be transferred
to the legal custody of the National Archives. NARA determines that most federal records have
temporary value and authorizes agencies to destroy them when they are no longer needed for
agency business needs, or when legal or public accountability interests have generally expired. A
temporary determination by NARA, however, still requires agencies to maintain those temporary
records for an amount of time that allows the agency to fulfill their obligations. All Federal records
have value and must be kept for some period of time; however, few records have permanent
value.

Email Management
Email often meets the definition of a federal record as provided in the Federal Records Act (44
U.S.C., § 3301), which includes:

“… all traditional forms of records, regardless of physical form or characteristics, including
information created, manipulated, communicated, or stored in digital or electronic form.“

Management of email, however, has remained a challenge to most, if not all, federal agencies. In
what is often referred to as “traditional records management,” the email management burden is
typically placed on each end-user to make a record or nonrecord decision and to determine
retention and final disposition under existing records schedules based on the content of the
message, on an email-by-email basis. Further, end users may need to determine whether cross-

1 http://www.archives.gov/about/info/mission.html
2 http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/policy/records-schedule-review-process.html
3 http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/initiatives/appraisal.html

===== SOURCE PAGE 5 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

5 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
filing individual emails with other records (such as case files) is required. The end-user must also
manage nonrecord4 email, including those of a personal nature.

Using a traditional records management method, and often due to the lack of effective and
affordable electronic records management systems, many agencies adopted a “print-and-file”
policy. This policy typically instructs users that electronic records – including email – are to be
printed into hard-copy (paper) for official filing. This paper version becomes the official
recordkeeping version. This process requires manual intervention by the user, who has to
determine whether each email is a federal record, and then determine the appropriate disposition
authority and filing location for each email record.

Until recently, NARA supported this practice even as it encouraged agencies to adopt electronic
recordkeeping systems, for example through the endorsement of the DoD 5015 standard
5. The
increasing designation of electronic records as the record copy, as well as the growing exponential
volume of email that federal agencies are responsible for managing, made this practice untenable
as an email strategy. This has led to resource allocation issues: 1) a risk that permanently valuable
email is not being appropriately captured and transferred to NARA, and 2) a risk that temporary
email is being destroyed too soon or kept far too long.

In 2007, Congress began holding hearings on email records management by the White House and
federal agencies. Congress passed legislation requiring email records be managed electronically.

Recently, the press reported several high profile instances of alleged or actual email
mismanagement, further highlighting the email management challenge; most notably from the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
6, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid’s Services (CMS)7, and the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).8 These stories further demonstrate the need for a more
practical method for managing and preserving email in the Federal Government.
SECTION 2: RECORDS MANAGEMENT GUIDANCE

Over the past decade, NARA has conducted studies, provided email management guidance,

4 Nonrecord materials are those Federally owned informational materials that do not meet the statutory definition of
records (44 U.S.C. 3301) or that have been excluded from coverage by the definition. Excluded materials are extra
copies of documents kept only for reference, stocks of publications and processed documents, and library or museum
materials intended solely for reference or exhibit. Personal files (also called personal papers) are a type of nonrecord
material and are documentary materials belonging to an individual that are not used to conduct agency business.
Personal files are excluded from the definition of Federal records and are not owned by the Government.  (36 CFR
1220.18)
5 The DoD 5015.02-STD, signed 25 April 2007, defines the basic requirements, based on operational, legislative and
legal needs, that must be met by records management application (RMA) products acquired by the Department of
Defense (DoD) and its Components. It defines requirements for RMA's managing classified records and includes
requirements to support the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), Privacy Act, and interoperability.
6 Bump, Philip. “Here’s How the IRS lost emails from key witness Lois Lerner.” The Washington Post, June 16, 2014.
7 Viebeck, Elise. “ObamaCare office may have lost emails sought in oversight probe .” The Hill, August 7, 2014.
8 Desjardins, Lisa. “Environmental Protection Agency tells Congress it lost emails too.” CNN, October 3, 2014.

===== SOURCE PAGE 6 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

6 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
revised regulations for electronic records management, and explored alternative ways of
managing email. Policies and guidance released by NARA are available to the public at NARA’s
Email Management9 webpage and specific tools may be found in NARA’s Records Management
Toolkit.10

In response to direction from senior NARA management in 2010, NARA formed the Email
Management 2.0 working group. This group, led by NARA’s Office of the Chief Records Officer,
developed new guidance that aligns with other major records management initiatives under
development. It was through this group that the Capstone Approach was researched, developed,
and promulgated as guidance.

The Presidential Memorandum and Directive
With the signing of the
Presidential Memorandum on Managing Government Records11 by
President Obama on November 28, 2011, and the subsequent issuance of the Managing
Government Records Directive12 (M-12-18) on August 24, 2012, by the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) and NARA, a new emphasis was placed on electronic records management.

Specific to email management, Section 1.2 of M-12-18 states, in part, that “[b]y December 31,
2016, federal agencies must manage all email records in an electronic format.” This requirement
essentially does away with the traditional print-and-file policies and requires agencies to
implement new approaches to manage their email electronically. Some agencies have had success
with automated products and solutions, such as software that can automatically determine email
content based on keyword searches and assign disposition accordingly. Although technology for
fully automated email management is improving, other solutions for email management are
required in the interim.

NARA Bulletin 2013- 02, The Capstone Approach
Based on the efforts of the NARA Email Management 2.0 group, and the requirements of the M-
12-18, NARA released Bulletin 2013-02,
Guidance on a New Approach to Managing Email
Records13 on August 29, 2013 (known as the “Capstone Bulletin”). NARA Bulletin 2013-02
introduced new guidance to assist agencies in meeting the requirements of Section 1.2 of M-12-
18.

In addition to the requirements of M-12-18, NARA created this guidance to aid agencies in dealing
with the overwhelming volume of email records and to ensure that NARA receives the
permanently valuable email of federal agencies. Even though email has been in wide-spread use in
federal agencies for over two decades, NARA has not received significant amounts of

9 http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/email-mgmt.html
10 All products are available on NARA’s website, http://www.archives.gov/reco rds-mgmt/toolkit/#list
11 http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/11/28/presidential-memorandum-managing-government-
records
12 http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2012/m -12-18.pdf
13 http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/bulletins/2013/2013-02.html

===== SOURCE PAGE 7 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

7 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
electronically-managed email through traditional records scheduling policies or traditional records
management practices.

The Capstone Bulletin established an additional means of managing and scheduling email records
where final disposition is determined by the role or position of the account user, rather than the
content of each individual email. This allows email disposition to be carried out in a systematic
way, where email within accounts designated as permanent (or other individual emails
categorized as permanent, regardless of account status) are transferred to the legal custody of the
National Archives, and email within accounts designated as temporary are eligible for eventual
destruction. This eliminates the email-by-email review by individual end-users within agencies.

The Capstone approach can generally be summarized with the following points:

 Email is managed in an electronic format in compliance with Section 1.2 of M-12-18.
 Final disposition is based on the role or position of the end-user, not the content of each
individual email record.
 Email of senior officials could be scheduled as permanent, eventually being transferred to
the legal custody of NARA.
 Email of other federal employees could be scheduled as temporary, with authority for
eventual destruction.
 Capstone affords flexibility, allowing agencies to design an approach that fits their
technology, business needs, and culture.
 Use of the Capstone approach is not mandatory; agencies may develop other solutions that
comply with Section 1.2 of M-12-18.

Agencies are encouraged to manage their email records through a Capstone approach. In addition
to creating an agency policy on email and an implementation plan, a Capstone approach is further
strengthened by:

 Use of automated solutions to block email from specific domains or email addresses from
capture (for example, personal email from the accounts of family members account,
material that is clearly personal in nature and not a federal record),
 Use of automated solutions to block duplicates (such as email blasts) from capture, and
 Allowing for manual management; for example, allowing end-users time to apply
traditional records management before system capture begins (for example, applying other
disposition authorities, or deleting nonrecord material).

===== SOURCE PAGE 8 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

8 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS

Between September 2013 and February 2014, NARA provided training to federal agencies on the
Capstone Bulletin and the Capstone approach. This effort led to the creation of other resources to
assist agencies. These resources are available on NARA’s Email Management webpage.14
SECTION 3: Disposition Authority for Email Records

The guidance provided in the Capstone Bulletin gives agencies guidance on how to develop a
Capstone approach that meets their business needs. It does not, however, provide disposition
authority for email records. NARA disposition authority, as with any other federal records, is
required when using a Capstone approach.

As highlighted above, prior to the release of the Capstone Bulletin, agencies would rely on a
multitude of disposition authorities to manage their email. An email related to a personnel matter,
for example, would be disposed of in accordance with personnel-related authorities. An email
related to a specific project would be disposed of in accordance with the disposition authority
related to those project files. One user’s entire body of email would often require use of multiple
disposition authorities for proper management. Individual end-users were often not equipped
with the resources (including knowledge of disposition authorities) to properly manage their
email. This increased the risk of either loss of email through improper disposition or the retention
of all email for much longer than actually required by current authorities, unnecessarily expends
agency resources and puts additional disclosure burdens on the agency.

The Capstone Bulletin allows agencies to propose a disposition schedule where email becomes its
own records series, similar to that of correspondence, with specific disposition instructions for
entire bodies of email. Email of senior officials, for example, could be approved for permanent
retention, while email of all other officials could be approved for temporary retention. NARA’s role
in approving disposition authorities under the Capstone approach would be twofold:  identify
senior officials’ accounts for permanent retention and determine the appropriate retention for
temporary email to meet agency business needs and assure rights and accountability.

14 http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/email-mgmt.html
NOTE:  It is important to note that the implementation of a Capstone approach for the
management of agency email does not negate other recordkeeping responsibilities. As
outlined in the Capstone Bulletin, agencies may still have a need to cross-file certain
email with other records, such as case files or subject files. Agencies will remain
responsible for ensuring that all other records, including program and project files, are
still scheduled and managed appropriately. NARA will continue to receive other
permanent record series from federal agencies outside the Capstone approach.

===== SOURCE PAGE 9 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

9 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS

SECTION 4: CAPSTONE GRS DEVELOPMENT

Acknowledging that the majority of federal agencies had an interest in adopting a Capstone
approach, NARA next turned its focus to the development of a General Records Schedule (GRS) to
provide disposition authority for email records managed under such an approach.

The goal of the Capstone GRS is to help agencies meet the requirements of M-12-18. This GRS will
allow them to focus on implementation and the management of their email rather than the
process of seeking disposition authority from NARA. For NARA, from a government-wide
perspective, this GRS will support NARA’s oversight responsibilities by reducing subjectivity and
increasing consistency in the determination of Capstone officials. The Capstone GRS will establish
a baseline understanding of roles and disposition of email across the government. This will reduce
the risk of improper implementation.

Development of the Capstone GRS began in May 2013, with the creation of a NARA intra-agency
working group. The group consisted of individuals who have a stake, or are subject matter experts,
in NARA processes and government-wide records management policy.

The development team, comprised of senior NARA staff in the Office of General Counsel, the
Office of the Chief Records Officer, and NARA’s Research Services, drafted the GRS and created a
supplemental FAQ to provide further guidance to aid in schedule implementation.

Challenges
One of the challenges in developing the Capstone GRS was creating a definition of “Capstone
officials”—the definition had to identify those officials whose accounts warrant permanent
retention; contain recognizable official positions that would allow for maximum application to
various federal agency organizational structures, and ultimately ensure increased transfers of
permanently valuable email to NARA.

The efforts to craft this definition resulted in two goals: 1) reduce the possibility of multiple,
conflicting interpretations within an agency by developing a clear and understandable definition;
NOTE:  The Capstone GRS provides disposition authority for agencies implementing a
Capstone approach; it does not provide disposition authority for other email records
management strategies. Agencies implementing a Capstone approach must adhere to
the definitions provided in this GRS, including the definition of Capstone officials. If an
agency cannot adhere to the definitions in the Capstone GRS, they must submit an
agency-specific schedule.

===== SOURCE PAGE 10 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

10 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
and 2) increase consistency by ensuring that the same type or level of accounts were identified for
permanent retention across the Federal Government.

An additional challenge concerned the appropriate retention length for temporary email. The
development team had to balance the realities of limited technological resources within federal
agencies with the need to maintain temporary email long enough to meet agency business and to
assure rights and government accountability. Ultimately, item 011 was crafted for the majority of
temporary email within a given agency, with a minimum retention of 7 years. Item 012 was
developed as an exception to item 011, allowing for earlier disposition for email in accounts that
fall into a very narrow definition of clearly administrative and/or routine duties.

Targeted Focus Group
A targeted focus group was held on May 16, 2014, to solicit feedback from eight agencies on a
draft version of the GRS and FAQ developed by NARA staff. The focus group included records
management, legal, and information technology officials from several agencies and the discussion
focused on the clarity and implementation of the product, including feedback on item descriptions
and retention periods, and resulted in changes to the draft GRS.

The focus group illustrated that:

 There was an interest in NARA developing a GRS for Capstone email records.
 Agencies wanted a clear and precise definition of Capstone (permanent) officials, with little
room for subjectivity.
 Agencies wanted flexibility in managing temporary accounts, especially for email accounts
of very low-level staff performing administrative duties.

Government -wide Review
NARA solicited additional comments on the revised GRS and FAQ drafts via government-wide
review in July and August 2014. NARA received comments from numerous agencies. NARA
employees also submitted comments during this review period. The number of comments totaled
nearly 140. The GRS Development Team adjudicated the comments and made substantial changes
to the GRS and FAQ.

Findings from this review included:

 There was an interest in NARA developing a GRS for Capstone email records.
 Agencies required further information about implementation of not only the GRS but also
the Capstone approach in general (which were added to the FAQ).
 The definition of Capstone officials needed to be as specific as possible. Earlier versions of
the definition were too subjective to ensure proper implementation.
 Flexibility for the temporary email retention was necessary.
 Based on the comments received, NARA should consider a “verification and approval”
process for those using this GRS.

===== SOURCE PAGE 11 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

11 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
Internal Tests
At several points during development of the Capstone GRS the definition of Capstone officials
within item 010 (see appendix A) was tested against the organizational structure of several
selected agencies. The primary goal was to illustrate whether there could be multiple, inconsistent
interpretations of the definition of Capstone official and therefore identify potential issues and
risks with these interpretations. Worksheets were created and development team members
utilized agency organization charts, PLUM book15 entries, and other resources to apply the
definition against these agencies. A secondary goal was to increase consistency to ensure that the
same type and/or level of accounts could be identified for all agencies utilizing the Capstone GRS.
This led to a significant revision of the definition presented in the current draft. The development
team saw this as a major step in refining the GRS to ensure proper implementation.

While finalizing this definition, members of the development team acknowledged that more email
will likely be transferred as permanent than would have been under application of traditional
records management. For example, Capstone may include the email of officials by virtue of their
role or position, but who otherwise may not have any other permanent records associated with
that role or position. NARA believes this is an appropriate trade-off to ensure that the
permanently valuable email is transferred into its legal custody.

Structure  of the Capstone GRS
The final draft of the Capstone GRS accounts for all the previously mentioned factors in three
separate items:

Item 010: Provides disposition authority for the email of senior officials (i.e., Capstone officials).
The item includes a definition of Capstone officials broken down into nine categories and identifies
those positions that are required for inclusion when an agency is using this GRS. Please refer to the
draft Capstone GRS (Appendix A) for further description of these categories.

The nine categories were created after considering all comments, and after significant review of
agency organizational structures. Although the implementation of this GRS may not assure that all
permanently valuable email is transferred to NARA, or prevent non-permanently valuable email
from being transferred, the Capstone GRS development team felt confident that this definition
appropriately identifies permanent Capstone roles and/or positions.

Item 011: Provides disposition authority for the email of all other officials not included in either
item 010 or 012. This item is intended to be used for the majority of email managed within a given
agency. It sets a minimum retention of 7 years. The item does, however, authorize a longer
retention based on agency business needs.

15 Every four years, just after the Presidential election, the United States Government Policy and Supporting Positions,
commonly known as the PLUM Book, is published, alternately, by the Senate and the House. The PLUM Book is used
to identify presidentially appointed positions within the Federal Government. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/GPO-
PLUMBOOK-2012/content-detail.html

===== SOURCE PAGE 12 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

12 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
Although some large agencies have expressed concern about the cost of retaining very large
volumes of temporary email for seven years, NARA believes that a baseline, seven-year retention
for the preservation of temporary email records is appropriate. This will not only meet agency
business needs, but also ensure adequate and proper documentation of the policies and
transactions of the Federal Government. The preservation of these records for this period of time
should generally provide for the adequate defense of the Federal Government in litigation. This
presumptive retention period is consistent with most statutes of limitations to pursue matters
against the United States, which is generally six years. Additionally, this retention period aligns to
recordkeeping requirements set forth by Congress, such as the seven-year retention for audit-
related records established in the financial reforms of Sarbanes-Oxley, and with the IRS’s seven-
year retention period for personal tax records, which is tied to the six-year statute of limitations
for criminal violations of the tax code (26 U.S.C., § 6531). These examples, along with others, have
led NARA to conclude that seven years is an appropriate baseline retention period for temporary
email records.

Item 012: Provides disposition authority for a very small subset of email. NARA developed this
item based on feedback received during the agency focus group and during government-wide
review. It acknowledges that there is a group of employees in purely administrative or support
positions that receive email related to very specific, administrative and/or routine duties.
Additional guidance is provided in the FAQ to assist agencies in using this item appropriately. It is
expected that the majority of temporary email accounts within an agency should be disposable
under item 011, which has a minimum retention of 7 years, rather than under item 012.

The draft also includes instruction and guidance on culling
16 within the introduction of the GRS
and further within FAQs 19 - 22. Culling was incorporated into the guidance as a result of both
internal and external comments, specifically:

• Agencies wanted the flexibility to allow users (or IT administrators) to cull personal and/or
nonrecord material. Some agencies expressed concern of personal email being released as
part of the permanent record.
• NARA custodial units wanted to reduce the amount of duplicate material and nonrecord
material found in transfers of permanent records.

Culling aligns with the requirements of the Federal Records Act, and is a principle of good records
management. The Federal Records Act directs that nonrecord material be managed by the agency,
and purged when no longer needed; NARA’s approval is not required to destroy such materials (
36
CFR 1225.18(c)). Culling assists in assuring that clearly nonrecord material is not transferred with
permanent records.

Although NARA determined that culling is not mandatory due to the technological limitations of

16 Culling, in the context of Capstone implementation, is the act of removing or deleting material prior to disposition.
This may include deletion of email blasts (such as agency-wide communications), spam, personal email (records
belonging to an individual and not related to agency business), and/or transitory emai l (records of short term interest
or that have minimal documentary or evidentiary value).

===== SOURCE PAGE 13 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

13 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
some email systems, culling is desirable to the greatest extent practicable. NARA email
management resources include guidance on the use of automated tools within email applications
that could, for example, exclude email from specific email addresses and/or specific domains from
capture. The flexibility within the Capstone approach allows for manual, automated, or a hybrid of
both manual and automated culling.

Although NARA’s culling expectations will potentially reduce the volume of nonrecord material
transferred, NARA accepts that some amount of personal, duplicate, and nonrecord material will
likely be transferred as part of the permanent record. FAQs 20 through 22 further document the
importance of culling, and NARA’s role in culling after permanent email records have been
transferred to NARA.

The Capstone GRS FAQ
To assist in the implementation of the Capstone GRS, NARA developed the Capstone GRS FAQ. The
final draft of the Capstone GRS FAQ includes 23 questions that further explain additional resources
available, general implementation, verification requirements, differences between items, transfer
of permanent accounts, culling, and acceptable formats. The FAQ should be used in conjunction
with the GRS.

Verification and Approval Process
To further address implementation challenges, the development team concluded that a
“verification and approval” process is necessary for those agencies utilizing this GRS. This
verification and approval process will allow NARA oversight of the identification of positions and
ensures they are identified consistently across the Federal Government. Several agencies have also
expressed a desire to have some form of NARA approval of their Capstone officials prior to
implementing Capstone and the Capstone GRS. A verification and approval process will increase an
agency’s confidence in implementing Capstone appropriately while ensuring NARA is fulfilling its
oversight responsibilities.

This verification process will require agencies implementing this GRS to submit a NARA form
(number pending), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1, to receive approval prior to
implementation of any items of this GRS (see Appendix C). The form serves as either a list of
permanent Capstone officials for implementation of item 010, or a list of positions excluded from
implementation of items 011 and 012.

The instructions for the verification form define the nine categories of senior officials provided in
the definition of Capstone (permanent) accounts in item 010. These definitions acknowledge that
different agencies often use different titles for similar positions and are meant to assist agencies in
properly identifying those senior officials within their agency that correlate to each category.

The NARA development team is still refining the process of verification and approval. Procedures
will be released with the formal transmittal of the Capstone GRS.

===== SOURCE PAGE 14 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

14 The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS
Next Steps
NARA will be publishing the draft GRS in the Federal Register for public comment in April 2015.
NARA will also hold a public meeting in May 2015 to address any comments or concerns interest
groups or the public may have regarding the draft GRS. All comments received either through the
Federal Register publication process, or the public meeting, will be adjudicated. Final GRS
transmittal is planned for September 2015.

===== SOURCE PAGE 15 =====
The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS A-1
APPENDIX A: THE CAPSTONE GRS

GENERAL RECORDS SCHEDULE 6.1: EMAIL MANAGED UNDER A CAPSTONE APPROACH
This schedule applies ONLY to Federal agencies that implement a Capstone approach as described in this GRS. When implementing this GRS, agencies
should consult the FAQs about GRS 6.1, Email Managed under a Capstone Approach. Agencies are reminded that this GRS should not be implemented in
isolation, and should be supplemented with agency-wide policies and training, as well as incorporated into agency records management implementation
tools, such as manuals and file plans. Agencies adopting a Capstone approach should also consult other resources available from NARA related to email
management, specifically the Capstone approach. These resources are available on NARA’s
email management page and are summarized in the
introduction to the FAQ.

Agencies must not implement this GRS until approval of
NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1. Additional information,
including a link to the form, may be found in FAQ 3 and in the instructions accompanying the form.

GRS Scope

Email can be managed at an account level, at a mailbox level, in personal folder files, or other ways. This GRS applies to all email, regardless of how the
email messages are managed or what email technology is used. Email, in the context of this GRS, also includes any associated attachments. This GRS may
apply to records affiliated with other commonly available functions of email programs such as calendars/appointments, tasks, and chat.

Each agency is responsible for determining the scope of implementation when using Capstone, including:
• The range of implementation in an organization (agency-wide, specific office, etc.);
• The range of implementation regarding email technology and system platforms;
• The parameters for inclusion of day forward/active and/or legacy/inactive email; and
• The extent of inclusion of classified email.
Brief information on the scope of an agency’s Capstone implementation is also required on the NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing
GRS 6.1.

Agencies are also responsible for defining (and documenting through policy) the official recordkeeping version of email to be managed under a Capstone
approach, especially when email is captured or retained in multiple locations (e.g., an email archive vs. the live system). All other versions of email can be
considered nonrecord, the retention of which should be addressed in agency email policy.
DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 16 =====
The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS A-2

Agencies are expected to apply documented selection criteria to cull the email of Capstone officials (permanent accounts) to the greatest extent possible
before transfer to NARA. Culling refers to the removal – or otherwise excluding from capture – of nonrecord, personal, or transitory messages and
attachments. Culling typically includes the removal of spam, email blasts (such as agency-wide communications), and personal materials (such as emails to
family members not related to agency business). Culling may be manual, automated, or a hybrid of both.

Applying this GRS

When applying this GRS in part, agencies must ensure that all other email records are covered by another NARA-approved disposition authority. Agencies
NOT managing any of their email under the Capstone approach are still responsible for managing their email by applying NARA-approved records
schedules.

If an agency is implementing a Capstone disposition approach different from what is provided in this GRS, the agency must submit a records schedule. For
example, an agency may want to narrow the list of minimum [the “must”] positions in item 010, use shorter retention lengths for temporary records, or
extend the time frame for transfer of permanent records.

Agencies have the discretion to designate individual email messages and attachments as short-term or transitory records covered by another GRS or as
permanent or longer-term temporary records covered by another GRS or an agency records schedule.

Agencies must transfer to NARA the emails of Capstone officials captured during their tenure as a Capstone official. Therefore, email of Capstone officials
created prior to their designation as a Capstone official (e.g., prior to their promotion/rotation into a Capstone position) should be treated as temporary
and not transferred to NARA. For guidance on transferring email as a permanent record, see NARA Bulletin 2014-04, Revised Format Guidance for the
Transfer of Permanent Electronic Records and the relevant sections of
36 CFR Part 1235.

Item Records Description Disposition Instruction Disposition
Authority
010 Email of Capstone Officials.
Capstone Officials are senior officials designated by account level or by email addresses, whether the addresses
are based on an individual’s name, title, a group, or a specific program function. Capstone officials include all
those listed on an approved NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1, and must
include, when applicable:

1) The head of the agency, such as Secretary, Commissioner, Administrator, Chairman or equivalent;
2) Principal assistants to the head of the agency (second tier of management), such as Under Secretaries,
Assistant Secretaries, Assistant Commissioners, and/or their equivalents; this includes officers of the
Permanent. Cut off at
the end of the calendar
year. Transfer to NARA
when the records are 15
years old, or after
declassification review
(when applicable),
whichever is later.

DAA-GRS-
2014-0001,
item 0001

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 17 =====
The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS A-3
Armed Forces serving in comparable position(s);
3) Deputies of all positions in categories 1 and 2, and/or their equivalent(s);
4) Staff assistants to those in categories 1 and 2, such as special assistants, confidential assistants, military
assistants, and/or aides;
5) Principal management positions, such as Chief Operating Officer, Chief Information Officer, Chief
Knowledge Officer, Chief Technology Officer , and Chief Financial Officer, and/or their equivalent(s);
6) Directors of significant program offices, and/or their equivalent(s);
7) Principal regional officials, such as Regional Administrators, and/or their equivalent(s);
8) Roles or positions that routinely provide advice and oversight to the agency, including those positions
in categories 1 through 3 and 5 through 7, including, General Counsels, Chiefs of Staff, Inspectors
General, etc.; and
9) Roles and positions not represented above and filled by Presidential Appointment with Senate
Confirmation (PAS positions).

This includes those officials in an acting capacity for any of the above positions longer than 60 days. Agencies
may also include individual emails from otherwise temporary accounts appropriate for permanent disposition
in this category.

Additional email addresses may be included, representing roles, positions, and/or programs within the agency
that predominantly create permanent records related to mission critical functions or policy decisions and/or
are of historical significance. This may include email of staff in lower level (non-senior) positions, or email
related to functions in lower-level offices. For example, an agency with mission-centric task forces may include
the head of each task force within their Capstone officials.

If a Capstone official has more than one agency-administered email account, this item applies to all accounts. If
a Capstone official has an email account managed by other staff (such as personal assistants, confidential
assistants, military assistants, or administrative assistants), this item applies to those accounts. This item
applies to all email regardless of the address names used by the Capstone official for agency business, such as
nicknames or office title names, and email from personal or non-agency email accounts authorized for use for
official agency business.
Please consult NA Form XXXX for more information on which positions are included within each category.
NOTE: Cabinet level agencies implementing a Capstone approach that includes their components/operatives
must apply the above definition to each component individually. In these cases, each component/operative is

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 18 =====
The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS A-4
considered a separate agency in terms of the above definition of Capstone Officials. A component/operative of
a cabinet level agency can implement a Capstone approach independent of their department but must also
conform to the entirety of this definition.

NOTE: Smaller agencies, micro-agencies or Commissions implementing a Capstone approach may find that
some of their Capstone positions fall into several of the categories above and/or that they do not have
applicable roles or positions for all categories.

Not media neutral; applies to records managed in an electronic format only.

011 Email of Non-Capstone Officials.
Email of all other officials, staff, and
contractors not included in item
010.

Not media neutral; applies to
records managed in an electronic
format only.

NOTE: Agencies only using item 011
and/or item 012 of this GRS may not
dispose of any email of officials
listed in the must section of the
description provided in item 010,
Email of Capstone Officials, of this
GRS without authority from NARA in
the form of another GRS or agency-
specific schedule. Submission and
approval of NARA form XXXX (NA-
XXXX), Verification for Implementing
GRS 6.1 is still required in these
instances to document those being
exempted from Capstone.

All others except those in item 012. Includes positions and email not
covered by items 010 or 012 of this schedule.

This item will apply to the majority of email accounts / users within an
agency adopting a Capstone approach.

Item may include transitory email, personal email, and/or email filed
with other records but not removed from the email repository.

Temporary. Delete
when 7 years old, but
longer retention is
authorized if required
for business use.

DAA-GRS-
2014-0001,
item 0002
012 Support and/or Administrative Positions. Includes non-supervisory
positions carrying out routine and/or administrative duties. These
duties comprise general office or program support activities and
frequently facilitate the work of Federal agencies and their programs.
This includes, but is not limited to, roles and positions that: process
routine transactions; provide customer service; involve mechanical
crafts, or unskilled, semi-skilled, or skilled manual labor; respond to
general requests for information; involve routine clerical work; and/or
primarily receive nonrecord and/or duplicative email.

Item may include transitory email, personal email, and/or email filed
with other records but not removed from the email repository.

Temporary. Delete
when 3 years old, but
longer retention is
authorized if required
for business use.
DAA-GRS-
2014-0001,
item 0003
DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 19 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-1
APPENDIX B: FAQS ABOUT THE CAPSTONE GRS

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) about
GRS 6.1, Email Managed Under a Capstone Approach

These FAQs are designed to aid in implementation of GRS 6.1 (Capstone GRS). Agencies are
reminded that this GRS should not be implemented in isolation and should be supplemented with
agency-wide policies and training, as well as incorporated into agency records management
implementation tools, such as manuals and file plans (see FAQ 16). Agencies adopting a Capstone
approach should also consult other resources available from NARA related to email management,
and specifically the Capstone approach. These resources are available on NARA’s
Email
Management Page, and include:

• Links to related, over-arching email and transfer related guidance;
• Recorded training sessions related to Capstone implementation best practices, determining
Capstone officials, and incorporating a Capstone approach within agency policies and
training programs;
• Recorded Briefings on the basics of Capstone, geared towards specific audiences
(managers, General Counsel, etc.);
• Checklists and Recorded Training Sessions on the basics of Capstone; and
• Information on NARA’s own implementation of a Capstone approach.

GENERAL QUESTIONS

1. What is the purpose of GRS 6.1?

The purpose of this schedule is to:

• Provide disposition authority for agencies who implement a Capstone approach as outlined
in
NARA Bulletin 2013-02: Guidance on a New Approach to Managing Email Records
[Capstone]; and
• Assist agencies in meeting Goal 1.2 of the Managing Government Records Directive (M-12-
18), which requires agencies to manage both permanent and temporary email records in
an accessible electronic format by December 31, 2016.

2. From whom may I request more information about this schedule?

You may contact NARA’s General Records Schedules Team at
GRS_Team@nara.gov with questions
about this schedule.

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 20 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-2

3. How does an agency document that it is using the Capstone GRS?

To ensure proper oversight and accountability, this GRS is not to be implemented until an agency
receives NARA approval of their list of Capstone officials. This applies when using item 010, and
acts as an exception list when only using items 011 and/or 012. Approval is obtained by submitting
NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1. Detailed instruction s are
provided within the form.

Additionally, NARA’s existing regulations and guidance contain several requirements for the
proper documentation of an agency’s use of the Capstone GRS and the Capstone approach in
general. These requirements include, but are not limited to:

• Update of the agency’s records management directive and submission to NARA per
36 CFR
1220.34(c);
• Posting of the agency’s records management directive on the agency’s website per the
FOIA, 5 USC 552(a)(1)(D)  and Office of Management and Budget’s Open Government
Directive (December 8, 2009); and
• Respond to any questions in NARA-issued requests for information consistent with 44 USC
Chapter 29, including those specific to Capstone use and implementation.

4. May an agency deviate from this GRS?

Yes, agencies may submit a records schedule requesting authority to implement a Capstone
approach that deviates from this GRS. Agencies choosing to use one or more items on this GRS,
however, without submitting an agency-specific schedule may not deviate from its parameters and
must submit
NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1. Reasons for
submitting an agency-specific schedule may include, but are not limited to:

• The agency determines that excluding one or more of the officials included in the must
section of the description provided in item 010, Email of Capstone Officials, is appropriate
(such as due to the non-substantive nature of their work or that their email is captured
within that of another Capstone official);
• The agency determines a need to establish a transfer date shorter than the minimum or
longer than the maximum in item 010; or
• The agency wants the authority to dispose of temporary email earlier than permitted by
the retention periods in items 011 and 012.

Agencies are encouraged to discuss scheduling options with their
NARA Appraisal Archivist.

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 21 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-3
5. What does this GRS mean when using the term “Official”?

In context of this GRS, an “official” includes all Federal agency employees regardless of their
appointment type. This, therefore, includes part-time employees, student employees, term,
temporary employees, volunteers, interns, members of the military, and contractors who create
Federal records.

6. Who are the Capstone officials covered by this GRS?

An agency’s Capstone officials are to be documented and submitted on
NARA form XXXX (NA-
XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1. This form contains additional instructions to assist
agencies in identifying their officials.  Capstone (permanent) officials are senior (e.g., those high on
the organization chart) officials generally responsible for agency and program policy- and mission-
related actions. Capstone officials will vary agency by agency depending on how the roles at the
agency are carried out and how the agency is organized. Some agencies will have more Capstone
officials than others.

Federal agencies utilize a variety of titles for senior officials; Agencies using item 010 of this
schedule must identify their equivalents for those positions described within each category
provided in the item’s description (when applicable).

Cabinet level agencies implementing a Capstone approach that includes their
components/operatives must apply the above definition to each component individually. In these
cases, each component/operative is considered a separate agency in terms of the above definition
of Capstone Officials. A component/operative of a cabinet level agency can implement a Capstone
approach independent of their department but must also conform to the entirety of this
definition. A general rule of thumb is that every record group (RG) included in the Capstone
implementation should have its own group of Capstone officials.

Agencies that require additional assistance in identifying their Capstone officials should contact
their
NARA Appraisal Archivist.

7. How do agencies determine what other roles and positions should be included as Capstone
officials?

Agencies may determine that there are additional Capstone roles and positions appropriate for
inclusion in item 010. As included in the may section of the description provided in item 010, Email
of Capstone Officials, this should include roles, positions, or programs that predominantly create
or maintain permanent records related to mission-critical functions, policy decisions, and/or have
historical significance that are not listed in the must section. These additional Capstone officials
should be included in the agency’s submission of
NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for
Implementing GRS 6.1

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 22 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-4
8. Does the GRS apply if Capstone officials have more than one email account or if their email is
managed by other staff (such as special assistants, confidential assistants, military assistants, or
administrative assistants)?

Yes. Senior officials often have multiple email accounts, either based on their title (e.g.,
ArchivistOfTheUnitedStates@nara.gov), or managed by another staff member on their behalf. All
accounts affiliated with a Capstone official role or position must be designated as permanent. See
category 4 within item 010.

Additional information may be found in NARA Bulletin 2013-03, Guidance for agency employees
on the management of Federal records, including email accounts, and the protection of Federal
records from unauthorized removal.

9. Must agencies maintain a list of Capstone officials and their associated email addresses?

Yes. Agencies should maintain an extended version of the NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification
for Implementing GRS 6.1 that includes this additional information. Doing so will support the
requirements in 36 CFR 1235.48, which states that proper documentation be included with the
transfer of permanent electronic records. The list will help with implementing Capstone and with
facilitating the export and transfer of permanent email. Best practices include managing a list of
Capstone officials and their associated email addresses as part of agency policy. Such a list should
be kept up-to-date. See also question 23.

10. What is the difference between items 011 and 012?

Item 011 is intended for all roles that do not fit into the descriptions of either 010 or 012. This item
is therefore appropriate for non-senior officials who have roles such as overseeing and instructing
workers on the job; reviewing work in progress; observing and securing worker compliance with
procedures and methods; planning, revising, and coordinating programs; planning general work
flow and methods; budgeting and financial oversight; and completing other mission related tasks.
See also questions 11 and 12. The majority of temporary email accounts should fall into this item.

Item 012 is intended for routine and/or administrative roles within an agency. Depending on an
agency’s unique organization, functions, and/or business needs, this item may only be appropriate
for a limited number of roles. Agencies having difficulty determining whether item 012 is
appropriate should use item 011.

11. Why are supervisory positions excluded from item 012?

Supervisory positions are those that plan, assign, and review work, and evaluate
performance. Because these positions tend to be involved in business and personnel
decisions, they are included in item 011 which specifies a minimum retention of 7 years. See
also questions 10 and 12.
DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 23 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-5

12. How does an agency determine if temporary email covered by items 011 and 012 should be
kept longer than the prescribed minimum retention?

Agencies should involve multiple stakeholders, such as their Senior Agency Official for Records
Management, General Counsel, Chief Information Officer, Records Officer, etc. for guidance in
determining the appropriate retention for email.

Items 011 and 012 each prescribe a minimum retention period, and the disposition instructions
support flexible scheduling. This authorizes an agency to make internal decisions on whether or
not temporary accounts should be kept longer based on business and legal needs. This decision
should be documented via agency policy and disseminated through agency-wide implementation
tools and training.

Agencies may determine that using only item 011 with one agency-wide retention for all
temporary email may better meet their business and legal needs and may also be easier to
implement. For example, under the parameters of this GRS, an agency may decide that all
temporary accounts are to be maintained for 7 years, regardless of role or position. Agencies
choosing to use only item 011 for temporary email also may maintain accounts longer for business
needs, e.g., 15 years, without additional authority from NARA. See also questions 10, 11, and 18.

13. Why is the minimum retention for item 011 7 years?

NARA believes that a baseline, seven-year retention for the preservation of temporary email
records is appropriate, not only to meet agency business needs, but also to ensure adequate and
proper documentation of the policies and transactions of the Federal Government. The
preservation of these records for this period of time should generally provide for the adequate
defense of the Government in litigation or the vindication of rights by a plaintiff in the event the
Government has infringed on such rights. This presumptive retention period is consistent with
most statute of limitations to pursue matters against the United States, which is generally six
years, with recordkeeping requirements set forth by Congress, such as the seven-year retention
for audit related records established in the financial reforms of Sarbanes-Oxley, and with the IRS’s
seven year retention period for personal tax records, which is tied to the six year statute of
limitations for criminal violations of the tax code. These examples, along with others, have led
NARA to conclude that seven years is an appropriate baseline retention period for temporary
email records.

This Capstone GRS allows agencies to elect a shorter retention using item 012 (3 years) for very
specific roles and positions. Please refer to FAQ 10 for additional information. Agencies who wish
to seek a shorter retention must submit an agency-specific schedule.

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 24 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-6
QUESTIONS ABOUT IMPLEMENTATION

14. May an agency implement portions of this GRS?

Yes, an agency may use any or all of the items on this GRS. If applying this GRS in part (for
example, only using item 011), agencies must ensure that all other email records are covered by
another NARA-approved disposition authority. Agencies that are only using item 011 and/or 012
are further reminded that they may not dispose of the email of any official listed in the must
section of the description provided in item 010, Email of Capstone Officials, without authority from
NARA in the form of another GRS or agency-specific schedule. An agency must still submit for
approval
NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1 in order to implement
the use of either only the permanent item or only the temporary items of this GRS.

This supports those agencies that may want to implement Capstone in phases. Some agencies may
find it practical to initially limit their overall Capstone approach to permanent email (item 010)
only and add management of temporary email within their overall Capstone approach later.

As indicated in the “GRS Scope” section of the Capstone GRS introduction, an agency may choose
to exclude several categories of email from coverage by this GRS. The agency must ensure that any
such email excluded from Capstone coverage is scheduled by another NARA-approved authority
before disposition is carried out on the email.  See also question 15.

15. Does the Capstone GRS apply to both retroactive and day-forward email?

Each agency should make the decision, and document such in agency policy, whether
implementation of Capstone is retroactive (applies to bodies of email created prior to Capstone
implementation) or day-forward. Some agencies, for example, may have had other email filing
policies in place prior to Capstone implementation and prefer that Capstone schedules be applied
from a certain date forward.

16. Does this GRS include calendars, appointments, tasks, chat transcripts and other
communications?

Although the Capstone approach was designed for the management of email records, some
agencies may not be able to separate email records from other affiliated records, such as
calendars, appointments, tasks, and chats. In these cases, the records may be covered by the
Capstone GRS. In instances where these records are managed separately from the email, agencies
must have NARA approved disposal authority.

17. How does this GRS affect NARA or agency requirements to file email records with other
related Federal records?
Capstone can reduce the burden on individual end-users by encouraging the greater use of
automated methods for managing email accounts. Agencies are responsible for managing their
DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 25 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-7
records in accordance with NARA regulations and  fulfilling the requirements of the Managing
Government Records Directive. When using the Capstone approach for capturing and managing
email, agencies are reminded of the following requirement as outlined in NARA Bulletin 2013-02,
Guidance on a New Approach to Managing Email Records [Capstone], item 5d:
Consider whether email records and attachments can or should be associated with
related records under agency guidance.
As a supplement to the Capstone approach, an agency may want or need to associate
certain email records that relate to other records, such as case files or project files, with the
related records. This consideration depends on an agency’s needs and how it chooses to
implement its Capstone approach. This may be accomplished by:
1. Using electronic pointers (such as metadata tags) to establish linkages, or
2. In select cases, filing with associated paper or electronic case or project files.

18. How can this GRS be incorporated into agency implementation tools and policies?

Best practices include the use of internal implementation tools, such as manuals, handbooks,
and/or file plans, for records management execution. As with any GRS, the items should be
incorporated into these tools and expanded to include agency-specific information and policies.
Agencies should also implement policy around their Capstone approach, to incorporate additional
agency specific email guidance that does not require NARA approval. For example, this could
include:

• Clearly defining the retention period for temporary email in policy and agency manuals,
since the GRS authorizes banding;
• Implementing policy on the use of Government accounts for personal purposes;
• Defining the Capstone (permanent) accounts/addresses for the agency with more
specificity than included in item 010, Email of Capstone Officials, (for example, those
positions and officials specific to your agency);
• Providing additional policy on how to handle email of officials in an acting position;
• Providing policy on managing nonrecord email;
• Including other disposition authorities related to email, including the GRS item for
transitory records;
• Providing information on agency policy related to culling and other opportunities to apply
records management to email; and
• Implementing procedures for initiating record freezes and litigation holds.

DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 26 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-8
QUESTIONS ABOUT CULLING

19. What is culling?

Culling, in the context of Capstone implementation, is the act of removing or deleting material
prior to disposition. This may include deletion of email blasts (such as agency-wide
communications), spam, personal email (records belonging to an individual and not related to
agency business), and/or transitory email (records of short term interest or that have minimal
documentary or evidentiary value). Please refer to
GRS 23, item 7, for additional information on
what constitutes a transitory record.

20. Are agencies/users expected to cull Capstone email accounts?

Yes. Since agencies are most familiar with the content of their email records, culling permanent
accounts is expected to the greatest extent possible. Culling may be manual, automated, or a
hybrid of both. For temporary email, agencies are free to choose the amount of culling to be
allowed, based on agency business needs, including size of the email repository, cost of
maintenance, and risk associated with the possible destruction of records that may be needed for
agency business, including litigation.

21. What if an agency can’t cull email?

An agency should review its policies and technology to determine and verify its culling capabilities.
Some technologies may not allow culling as described above. Agencies may still implement
Capstone for permanent accounts but must understand that this will result in the transfer and
potential preservation of emails that do not meet the definition of a Federal record. NARA screens
and, when warranted, withholds access to accessioned records in accordance with the general
restrictions set out in 36 CFR 1256.40-1256.62.  NARA decides on the access permitted to
accessioned records containing personal privacy information per 36 CFR 1256.56 without
consulting the originating agency. As part of NARA’s mission to provide public access to Federal
Government records in our custody and control, weight is put on disclosure when legally
permissible.

22. Will NARA cull Capstone email after it’s legally transferred?

Since agencies are most familiar with the content of their email records, they are expected to cull
nonrecord material to the extent possible before transferring. In accordance with 44 U.S.C. 2108,
custody of these records becomes the responsibility of the Archivist of the United States at the
time of transfer of the records. It is agreed that these records will be administered in accordance
with the provisions of 44 U.S.C. Chapter 21, 36 CFR XII, 36 CFR Part 1256 and such other rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the Archivist of the United States (the Archivist). The Archivist
may destroy, donate, or otherwise dispose of any containers, duplicate copies, unused forms,
blank stationary, non-archival printed or processes material, or other nonrecord material in any
DRAFT

===== SOURCE PAGE 27 =====
National Archives and Records Administration

The Capstone Approach and Capstone GRS B-9
manner authorized by law or regulation. Without further consent, the Archivist may destroy
deteriorating or damaged documents after they have been copied in a form that retains all of the
information in the original document. The Archivist will use the General Records Schedule and any
applicable records disposition schedule of the transferring agency to dispose of non-archival
materials contained in any transfer. NARA cannot, however, guarantee any level of culling of
records legally transferred.

QUESTIONS ABOUT TRANSFER

23. What documentation is required with the transfer of Capstone email?

See
NARA Bulletin 2014-04, Revised Format Guidance for the Transfer of Permanent Electronic
Records, for NARA’s requirements for transferring permanent electronic records. In addition, 36
CFR 1235.48 contains requirements for proper documentation needed for the transfer of
permanent electronic records. This documentation should be an extension of the agency’s
approved
NARA form XXXX (NA-XXXX), Verification for Implementing GRS 6.1, which documents
approved permanent Capstone roles and positions. Please also see question 9.

Agencies must transfer to NARA the email of Capstone officials captured during their tenure as a
Capstone official. Therefore, email of Capstone officials created prior to their designation as a
Capstone official (e.g., prior to their promotion/rotation into a Capstone position) should be
treated as temporary and not transferred to NARA. The following is an example of documentation,
in the form of a list, of an agency’s Capstone officials and the time period for capture of their email
as permanent:

Position Title Email Account/Address Begin Date of
Capture
End Date of
Capture
Secretary of [Department] Senior.Official@agency.gov January 22, 2013
Secretary of [Department] Secretary@agency.gov January 22, 2013
Chief Operating Officer John.Doe@agency.gov January 22, 2013 June 1, 2013
Chief Operating Officer Jane.Public@agency.gov June 2, 2013

DRAFT
